The Lebanese Republic
The Parliament

Consumer Protection Law
Sole Article
The draft law on Consumer Protection established by the decree No.13068 of 5
August 2004 has been approved as amended by the joint parliamentary committees
and the Parliament.
This law shall come into force at the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.

1

The Lebanese Republic
The Parliament

Consumer Protection Law
Article 1
The purpose of this law is to:
•

Outline the general rules concerning the protection of consumers and the
safety and quality of goods and services.

•

Assert consumer rights and guarantee the transparency of economic
transactions in which the consumer may engage.

•

Protect consumers from fraud and misleading advertisements and prevent
their exploitation.

The provisions of this Law shall not apply to relations that connect suppliers.
Article 2
For the purposes of this law:
•

“Consumer”: shall mean a natural or legal person who buys, rents, utilizes or
benefits from goods or services, for purposes other than his professional activity.

•

“Supplier”: shall mean a natural or legal person, from the private or the public
sector, engaged in the distribution, sale, or rent of goods or in the provision of
services, on his behalf, or in the interest of someone else. For the purposes of this
Law, “Supplier” shall also mean a person who imports goods with the aim of
selling, renting or distributing such goods, within the scope of his professional
activity.

•

“Manufacturer”: shall mean a person who transforms or assembles raw or
secondary materials.

•

“Goods”: shall mean immovables and movables whether nutritional, natural
transformed or manufactured.

•

“Service”: shall mean an act consisting of a technical, handicraft, or intellectual
activity, of any description as given by the supplier or the consumer.

•

“Price”: shall mean the sale price, the rental, or the use charge.

2

•

“Standards”: shall mean standards and technical regulations that define the
characteristics of goods or services, or the production method and the management
systems. It might also include terminology, symbols, data, packaging, marking and
labeling requirements, applied to a product or to its production method, with which
compliance is mandatory.

•

"Consumer Associations”: shall mean the associations established for nonpolitical, non-commercial or non-economic purposes. Such associations aim at
promoting consumers’ education, awareness and guidance, at protecting
consumers’ rights and interests and at representing consumers before all private and
official authorities.

•

“Advertiser”: shall mean a person who requests the broadcasting or the
publication of an advertisement through any means whatsoever.

•

“Emergencies”: shall mean those cases that cannot be remedied through the
regular course of action, that have a major impact on national security and on
human, animal and plant health and safety, and that necessitate immediate action..

Chapter Two
Consumer Rights

Article 3
The consumer shall have the following rights that shall be exercised in accordance
with the provisions of this Law:
•

The right to protect his health and safety when goods and services are used
under proper conditions.

•

The right to receive fair and non-discriminatory treatment from the
supplier of goods intended for local consumption or for exportation.

•

The right to receive exact, clear, and sufficient information about goods or
services and about the price, description and method of use of such goods
and services and the potential risk that they may pose.

•

The right to exchange or repair the goods or to get a refund of the price
already paid for a service if such goods or service, when used under proper
conditions, do not comply with the applicable or agreed standards or with
the purpose for which the goods or services are acquired.

•

The right to obtain an appropriate and full compensation for damage
resulting from the consumption of goods or the use of services, when used
under proper conditions.

3

•

The right to establish and adhere to Consumer Protection Associations.

•

The right to sue for damages or for the assertion of his rights, on his own
or through Consumer Protection Associations.

Chapter Three
Consumer Information
Article 4
Suppliers shall provide the consumers with exact, sufficient, and clear information
about:
•

Essential data about the goods or services and the directions for their use;

•

The price and the terms of the contract including the procedures of the
contract;

•

The risks that goods or services may pose.

Article 5
The supplier shall:
•

Conspicuously display the price in Lebanese pounds on the goods or on the
shelves where such goods are displayed.

•

Comply with the official weights and volumes metric system.

Article 6
Prices shall also be displayed in an easily identifiable place in service establishments,
especially hotels, furnished apartments, restaurants, cafés and amusement centers.

Article 7
The information determined by the relevant administration, must be displayed on the
labels attached to the goods or to the packages of such goods, depending on the
goods' nature and description and in accordance with applicable standards.
The above-mentioned information may include, inter alia:
•

The goods' nature, type, elements, ingredients and/or composition.

4

•

The net weight, volume or number of the goods.

•

The shelf life of the goods.

•

The country of origin, or the place of origin with regard to recognized
Countries Unions.

•

The name and address of the manufacturer or supplier.

•

The side effects and the safety instructions of the goods.

Article 8
Foodstuffs that are sold by weight in unpacked form shall be subjected to the control
of the Consumer Protection Directorate.
Article 9
The information on the labels or on the packages of the goods must be displayed in
principle in Arabic. In general, Arabic must be used for any act aimed at displaying
goods or services.
The cases where it is permissible to use French or English as a substitute for Arabic
shall be determined upon the decision of the Minister of Economy and Trade.
Article 10
When used, reconditioned, or faulty goods that do not cause any damage to consumer
health and safety, are displayed, the supplier must conspicuously indicate the state of
such goods on the goods and at his business location. The supplier must also indicate
the state of the goods in the contract of sale or in the invoice.

Chapter Four
Misleading Advertisement
Article 11
A misleading advertisement means an advertisement which by any means
includes a false representation, declaration or pretense or which contains
expressions of such a nature as to mislead or deceive the consumer, either directly
or indirectly.
Should be considered misleading the representation, declaration or pretense that
treats, inter alia, of one of the following issues:
•

The nature, composition and essential characteristics of the goods as
well as the elements or the element's quantity of such goods.

5

•

The origin, weight, volume, manufacturing method, expiry date,
directions for use or safety instructions of the goods.

•

The type of the service and the agreed place for the provision of such
service; the safety instructions and the essential characteristics in terms
of quality or benefits to be expected from such service.

•

The contract terms, the total price and the method of payment.

•

The advertiser's obligations.

•

The identity, qualifications and description of the manufacturer or
supplier.

Should also be considered a misleading advertisement:
1) The false declaration by the advertiser that he holds prizes, certifications,
attestations or private or official medals, and the claim of scientific
foundations not supported by evidence or facts.
2) The advertisement which include the illegal use of a logo or a trademark, or
the use of an imitated or simulated mark.
Article 12
The advertiser must proof the veracity of the information announced in his
advertisement and supply to the Consumer Protection Directorate or to the
relevant examining court the documents that they may request.
Article 13
The Ministry of Economy and Trade shall have the right to require the advertiser to
correct or amend its advertisement, to publish a notice of the correction or
amendment, or to broadcast such notice, through the same media which broadcasted
or published the misleading advertisement.
In addition, the examining court may automatically order to stop the broadcasting of
the misleading advertisement. The decision of the court in this regard must be
immediately implemented.
The judicial authority which makes such decision shall have the right to revoke it.
Article 14
The general principles regulating the advertisement related to goods and services and
the main requirements for such advertisements, shall be determined by virtue of a
decree issued by the Council of Ministers, at the suggestion of the Minister of
Economy and Trade.

6

Chapter five
Promotion of special offers

Article 15

The supplier, who advertises a special offer for the promotion of goods or services,
must determine either the period of time in which such goods or services are available
for sale, or the available quantity of such goods or services. The supplier shall, when
necessary, announce the terms of the contract.
Where the supplier does not determine such period or quantity, the offer shall last one
month after the date of the first advertisement unless the supplier has announced in
the same manner and through the same media the date at which his offer will be
concluded.
Article 16
Should the supplier fail to deliver the promoted goods or services exactly of the kind
advertised, the consumer may choose one of the following options:
-

to accept another goods or services of the kind advertised, if the supplier so
offers; or

-

to cancel the contract and recover any amount previously paid. The consumer
shall also have the right to claim damages resulting from the use of such
goods or services, which shall be no less than the difference between the price
of the goods or services during the period of the offer and their actual price.

Chapter Six
Contractual Relationship

Article 17:
The provisions of this Law treating of contracts concluded between suppliers and
consumers shall be enforced, without prejudice to the provisions of the laws on liberal
professions, banks, and insurance companies.
Article 18
A contract shall be interpreted in the favor of a consumer. The contract's
circumstances, the benefits resulting there from and the balance between the rights
and obligations of both parties, should all be taken into consideration in order to
determine the extent of a consumer’s satisfaction.

7

Article 19
A contract whether prepared by a supplier or approved by official authorities or the
contract that a consumer is not entitled to modify, must fulfill the following
requirements:
•

The contract must be drawn in simple and straightforward Arabic language.
English is however permissible where parties so agree.

•

The contract must not refer to texts or documents which had not been supplied
to the consumer before he had entered into the contract.

•

The contract must clearly determine the cost, the date of payment and the
method of payment and the place and time of delivery.

Article 20
The supplier must make a copy of the contract available to the consumer, in
order for the consumer to read such contract before entering into it.
Article 21
A supplier, who offers an installment plan, must provide the consumer with the
following information:
•
•

•
•
•
•

The cost, when the payment is settled at once not on credit.
The applicable annual interest rate; the supplier must also specify whether
the interest is simple or compound and determine the method of
calculation of such interest and the total amount of the interest and the
expenses to be paid by the consumer.
The number and amount of each installment and the due date for payment.
The total cost after all installments are paid, inclusive of the value of the
goods or services if paid at once added to the interests and expenses.
The rights and obligations of both a supplier and a consumer, whenever
one of them breaches the contract.
A supplier must also include the above mentioned information in the
contract that the supplier enters into with a consumer.

Article 22
A supplier shall provide the consumer with a copy of the contract that the supplier
had signed. This copy shall be exempted from all fees especially the stamp duty.

Article 23
A consumer may, at any time, settle all installments before maturity, provided that the
due interest is deducted from the amount of such installments.

8

When a financial institution or a bank enters into a contract with a consumer, the
procedures of the implementation of the previous paragraph, and when necessary, the
due penalties must be included in such contract.
Article 24
Settled payments must not be considered a deposit, unless if the consumer has been
previously informed, in writing, that he has no right to get a refund if he rescinds the
contract.
Article 25
A supplier or a service provider must provide the consumer with an invoice
encompassing the following data:
•
•
•
•
•
•

The name, commercial registration number and address of the establishment;
The identification of the product or service;
The sale or rent unit and its price;
The agreed quantity;
The amount of collected taxes and fees.
The date and the total value in LBP of the invoice.

If the product or service is not immediately delivered, the invoice must include
the place, date and conditions of delivery.
Article 26
The clauses, aiming at or leading to the creation of an imbalance between the rights
and obligations of a supplier and a consumer in the favor of the supplier, shall be
considered abusive.
The abusive aspect of a contract shall be evaluated on the basis of the date, clauses
and attachments of such contract, except for price-related clauses.
The following clauses shall be, inter alia, considered abusive:
•

The clauses that exempt the supplier from his liabilities.

•

The consumer's waiver of any of his rights prescribed by laws and
regulations.

•

The clause that places the burden of proof on the consumer, in cases other
than those prescribed by the Law.

•

The supplier's unilateral entitlement to modify one or all of the clauses of
the contract, especially in terms of price, date and place of delivery.

9

•

The supplier's entitlement to rescind an open-ended contract, without
notifying the consumer about his desire to rescind it, within a reasonable
period.

•

The consumer's obligation – if he breaches any of his contractual
obligations - to overcompensate the damage caused to the supplier.

•

The supplier's entitlement to interpret the provisions of the contract.

•

The consumer's obligation to carry out his commitments, while the
supplier abstains from carrying out his commitments.

•

The clause that does not allow mediation or arbitration for dispute
settlement in accordance with the provisions of this Law, or the clause that
burdens the consumer with the expenses due on arbitration or dispute
settlement.

Abusive clauses shall be deemed completely void, while all other clauses shall
remain applicable.
Article 27
The supplier or manufacturer must:
•

Provide parts or pieces necessary for the use of specific goods or services;

•

Provide after sale service and maintenance;

Such obligations shall be considered binding within a reasonable period of time,
commensurate with the expected date of use of the goods or services, unless the
consumer had received a written and express notice about a different period.
The supplier or manufacturer shall be exempted from the above mentioned
obligations, when the consumer receives an express written notice stating
undoubtedly, that the consumer or manufacture is not committed to any of these
obligations.
Chapter Seven
Guarantees

Article 28
The supplier shall guarantee the quality of the goods or services and the
availability of the description that such supplier has announced or that the
consumer has requested in writing. The supplier shall also guarantee that the
goods or services are delivered to the consumer without the objection of any third
party.

10

The supplier must not include in his contracts any clause that exempts him from
the obligations mentioned here above.
Article 29
The supplier shall guarantee invisible faults that concretely damage the goods or
services or make such goods or services unsuitable for the use to which they can
be put depending on their nature or on the provisions of the contract. The
guarantee shall neither cover faults that slightly damage the goods or services or
the use of such goods or services, nor faults customarily allowable.
The supplier must include the previous paragraph in all documents made available
to the consumer.
The supplier may commit himself to additional guarantees. In this case, the
additional guarantees shall be added to the guarantees laid down in this Law.
Article 30
The consumer or his successors must prove, by all means, that the invisible fault
existed at the date of delivery and that such fault had either caused concrete
damage to the goods or services or had made such goods or services unsuitable
for the purpose for which they are intended.
Article 31
The guarantee-related legal proceedings and the procedures of mediation or
dispute settlement prescribed in this Law shall be initiated within one month after
the fault had been discovered, unless the disrespectability of this period is due to
delaying tactics used by the supplier.
Article 32
A consumer shall have the right to request the cancellation of the contract and to
recover the amount already paid if the faulty goods mentioned in Articles 28 and
29 of this Law, had not been replaced or repaired within a reasonable period of
time proportionate to the nature of the goods or services. The consumer may in
addition to the above be able to claim damages.
Article 33
The supplier shall, before repairing the goods, notify the consumer in writing and
for free about the repair cost assessed and the duration of such repair.
The supplier shall, after the repair had been concluded, specify in the invoice
furnished to the consumer the parts that they were replaced and the price of such
parts and whether they are new, used or renovated.
The supplier shall guarantee the spare parts and shall be responsible for the labor
cost within a period lasting for 3 months after the date of delivery of the repaired

11

goods. This guarantee shall not cover cases where the goods are repaired due to
misuse.
Article 34
The provisions of the present chapter shall fall within the public order.

Chapter Eight
Safety of Goods and Services

Article 35
The provisions of this Law related to consumer health and safety as well as the
texts of applicable laws and regulations defining the standards related to specific
goods or services and the conditions for trading in such goods and services, shall
all be implemented.
Article 36
The supplier shall provide to the consumer information reasonably necessary for
the consumer to assess the risks linked to the use of the goods or services during
the expected period of such use.
Article 37
A manufacturer or supplier shall demonstrate in writing and clearly the best
method of use of the goods or services and warn the consumer of the risks that
could result from the misuse of such product or service.
The above-mentioned information must be written in Arabic.
Article 38
The supplier, who places goods or services for the first time on the market, must
ensure the compliance of such goods or services with the standards prescribed in
the applicable laws and regulations. The supplier must also ensure that the said
goods or services comply with the safety standards, if used properly and naturally.
Article 39
The Lebanese Accreditation Council established by the Law No.572 of 11
February 2004 shall specify the local and international laboratories, the
accreditation agencies and the inspection and prior testing offices, whose
certificates related to the safety of goods especially food safety, are recognized in
Lebanon.

12

Article 40
The Lebanese Accreditation Council established by the Law No.572 of 11
February 2004 shall specify the conditions required to grant scientific institutions
the authority to issue certificates attesting the compliance of goods and services
with the adopted standards.
Article 41
The Consumer Protection Directorate located at the Ministry of Economy and
Trade may request to test specific goods in accredited laboratories at the expense
of the manufacturer or supplier, especially when such goods are newly launched
or when doubts exist about a danger jeopardizing the health or safety of
consumers.
The Director General of Economy and Trade, may, when necessary, allow the retesting of such goods, provided that the supplier incurs the re-testing expenses, if
the retesting is decided at the supplier's request.
The Minister of Economy and Trade may, at the suggestion of the Director
General of Economy and trade, suspend the trading in such goods, until the
results of the tests have been obtained.
Article 42
The supplier shall cease the trading in goods or services which are not in
conformity with the safety-related applicable standards.
Article 43
The damaged person or his successors shall prove that the goods do not comply
with the applicable safety standards that are expected from the proper use of the
goods or services. The damaged shall also prove that the damage is caused in
result of such incompliance and indicate the value of such damage.
Article 44
When a manufacturer or supplier finds out by experience or in the light of the
information made available to him, that the goods or services that the he has
placed on the market contain one or more faults that might detriment consumers
health or jeopardize their safety, such manufacturer or supplier must take all
necessary measures to inform the public about the faults and warn of their risks,
through the media.
If such is the case, the manufacturer or supplier must, in addition to the above,
take the following measures:
•
•
•

To refrain from trading in the goods or services,
To withdraw the goods placed on the market.
To recall the goods sold or rent and reimburse the money already paid.

13

•

To exchange the goods at the supplier or manufacturer's own expense or
to reimburse the money already paid if the repair of the goods is
impossible.

In the cases mentioned here above, the supplier or the manufacturer shall notify the
Consumer Protection Directorate located at the Ministry of Economy and Trade about
the said risks and shall specify the measures to be taken.
The implementation of the above-mentioned measures shall not exempt the
manufacturer or the supplier from the obligation of compensating the damages
incurred by the consumer.
Article 45
When the Ministry of Economy and Trade has scientific proofs about a risk that may
result from the use of given goods or services and threaten public health or safety,
whether such risk had already occurred or is expected to occur, the Ministry shall
inform the public about the risks and the precautionary measures to be taken. If such
is the case, the Minister of Economy and Trade shall issue decisions laying down the
procedures aimed at protecting public health and safety, such as:
•
•
•
•
•

Prohibiting the importation or exportation of such goods in
emergencies;
Setting out specific requirements as to the importation or exportation
of such goods.
Prohibiting the trading in the goods or services.
Withdrawing the goods from the market, at the expense of the
manufacturer or supplier.
Destroying the goods at the expense of the manufacturer or supplier,
jointly and severally, if such a procedure is the only solution for the
protection of public health and safety.

Such decisions shall be published through the media and sent to the Council of
Ministers for approval.
In ordinary circumstances, the Council of Ministers shall give approval before the
decision prohibiting the importation or exportation of the goods has been taken.
Article 46
The manufacturer and the supplier shall be responsible for the damage caused by the
goods or services to public health and safety, even if the competent administration has
granted any type of certificates related to such goods or services.
In such a case, and where the existence of any serious risk is not proved to have
occurred at the time of the grant of the certificates, the government or the public
institutions shall not be liable for such damage.

14

Article 47
The special requirements concerning the importation or exportation of specific goods
shall be determined, when necessary, by virtue of decrees issued at the suggestion of
the Minister of Economy and Trade and the competent Minister, following
consultation with "The National Consumer Protection Council" mentioned in Article
60 of this Law.

Chapter Nine
Prohibited Practices

Article 48
The supplier or manufacturer shall be prohibited to perform the following acts:
•

•
•

•
•

Manufacturing, preparing, owning, transporting, displaying or distributing
all classes of goods or services in such a manner as to hide either their
nature, or their essential characteristics, or the proportion of their essential
ingredients;
Counterfeiting or attempting to counterfeit goods;
Manufacturing goods or rendering services incompliant with the
mandatory applicable standards or which jeopardize the consumer's health
or safety; displaying, distributing or promoting the use or purchase of
such goods or services, by any means;
Delivering goods or services incompliant with the adopted and agreed
standards, especially in terms of quantity, type, description or origin.
Misleading the consumer, by any means, such as by concealing or
neglecting information or by communicating to the consumer wrong
information about the nature, type, origin, essential characteristics,
composition and constituents of the goods or about the instructions for
use and expiry date of such goods.

Article 49
The following acts shall be prohibited:
•

The use of unchecked weighing and measuring devices and other
inaccurate instruments used in the weighing, measuring or gauging of
goods.

•

The use of devices or instruments for fraudulent practices.

15

Article 50:
Taking into consideration the provisions of Article 11 of this Law, the
supplier shall not be allowed:
•

•

•
•
•

To rescind the contract or tie the contract up with a certain number or
quantity of goods or services while the stores of such supplier are opened
to sell other goods, unless such goods or services have been subjected to a
special official regulation.
To tie up the sale of certain goods or the rendering of certain services with
the purchase of specific quantities or other goods or services, except for
cases where the buyer is able to buy separately any goods or services
object of a set offer or where such goods or services are sold in non
detachable packs or units.
To sell or rent any goods at a price exceeding the promoted price.
To deliver to the consumer goods or services without having expressed his
will to buy or rent such goods or services.
To provide to the consumer false information with regard to the following:
1. The date of the delivery of the goods or services.
2. The terms of the contract and the method of payment.

Chapter Ten
Distance or Door-to-Door Trading Practices.
Article 51
The provisions of this Chapter treats of distance or door-to-door trading practices
performed by the supplier, in particular the practices that take place at the residence
of the consumer, by telephone, through the Internet or by any other adopted means.
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply neither to financial and bank transactions
nor to auction sale and immovables-related transactions.
Article 52
In the cases prescribed in Article 51, the consumer must be provided with clear
information necessary to make a decision about entering into a contract, especially
concerning the following:
•
•
•
•

The identification, name, address, number and place of registration and email of the supplier, in addition to any other information necessary to
identify the supplier.
The goods or services subject of the offer, the instructions for the use of
such goods and services and the risks that may result from such use.
The length of the offer period.
The cost of the goods or services and the adopted currency in addition to
all the charges that may be added to the cost, especially fees, taxes and any
type of expenses, and the method of payment.
16

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

The guarantees offered by the supplier, and when necessary, the after sale
service.
The period of the contract relating to goods and services offered for sale
on a periodic basis.
The delivery date and place and the expenses due.
The procedures that shall implemented to conclude the contract which
shall be renewed by law at the expiration of its period.
The period in which the consumer may rescind the contract.
The law related to such trading practice and the relevant bodies, courts and
authorities entitled to settle any contract-related dispute.
The call cost.

Article 53
The supplier must furnish to the consumer a written document encompassing all
information mentioned in Article 52.
Article 54
The information provided by the supplier must enable the consumer to clearly
identify the product or the service offered for sale, and to look into a specimen of the
agreed agreement. The consumer shall also be entitled to modify or correct his order.
That being the case, both parties must keep a record of the whole trading practice
made.
Article 55
Contrary to any other text, the consumer who enters into a contract in pursuance to
the provisions of this Law may go back on the purchase or rent decision, within ten
days after the goods had been supplied or the services rendered.
However, the consumer shall not be entitled to the rights mentioned in the previous
paragraph in the following cases:
•

Where he had benefited from the service or used the goods before the ten
days period had elapsed.

•

Where the contract includes custom made goods or goods manufactured
according to conditions required by the consumer.

•

Where the contract includes video tapes, discs, compact discs, or computer
programs which had been unwrapped by the consumer.

•

Where the contract includes news papers, magazines and publications,
especially books.

•

Where the product becomes faulty due to being misused by the consumer.

17

Article 56
When the consumer exercises the right prescribed in Article 57, the supplier must
reimburse the consumer provided that such consumer incur the delivery charge if the
contract is rescinded after the goods had been delivered.
Article 57
The method of payment must be easy and secure and the consumer must be informed
about the terms of such method of payment.
Article 58
The supplier, with whom the consumer enters into a contract, must keep and conceal
the information obtained, unless the consumer has given express approval. The
supplier must also take all measures necessary to keep such information secret.
Article 59
The supplier who engages in indirect sale or rent practices must comply with the
provisions of this Law, especially with regard to misleading advertisement, promotion
of sale and public safety.

Chapter Eleven
The Role of the Government in the Protection of Consumers
Article 60
An advisory body known as the “National Consumer Protection Council” shall be
established at the Ministry of Economy and Trade.
The Minister of Economy and Trade shall preside over the National Consumer
Protection Council which shall include the following persons:
-

The Director General of the Ministry of Economy and Trade.

-

The Director General of the Ministry of Industry.

-

The Director General of the Ministry of Agriculture.

-

The Director General of the Ministry of Public Health.

-

The Director General of the Ministry of Environment.

-

The Director General of the Ministry of Tourism.

-

The Director General of the Ministry of Telecommunications.

18

-

The Director General of the Ministry of Information.

-

The Director General of the Ministry of Education.

-

The Chairman of the Lebanese Institution for Standards and Metrology.

-

Two representatives of the Federation of the Lebanese Chambers of
Commerce, Industry and Agriculture (FCCIAB), one representing the Traders
and the other representing the Agronomists, appointed by the Minister of
Economy and Trade, at the suggestion of the FCCIAB.

-

A representative of Industrialists, appointed by the Minister of Economy and
Trade, at the suggestion of the Lebanese Industrialists Association.

-

A representative of the Syndicate of the Advertising Agencies operating in
Lebanon, appointed by the Minister of Economy and Trade, at the suggestion
of the Syndicate of the Advertising Agencies and Companies operating in
Lebanon.

-

Two representatives of the Consumer Protection Associations, appointed by
the Minister of Economy and Trade, at the suggestion of the Consumer
Associations duly registered.

The president of the Council may summon any administration or institution
involved with any of the items on the agenda to attend the work sessions or call
for the help of any people having expertise.
Article 61
The “National Consumer Protection Council” shall propose suggestions aimed at
realizing the following goals:
•

To promote the role of the consumer in the national economy.

•

To safeguard the consumer safety and health and protect his rights.

•

To ensure the safety of goods and services and improve their quality.

•

To inform and educate the consumer and to encourage him to adopt
permanent consumption methods and to use environment friendly
products.

•

To suggest the definition of the procedures of implementation of the
provisions of this Law.

Article 62:

19

The functions of the “National Consumer Protection Council” shall be determined
by a Council of Ministers' decree at the suggestion of the Minister of Economy
and Trade.
Article 63:
A Consumer Protection Directorate shall be established at the General Directorate
of Economy and Trade, and the Consumer Protection Department prescribed in
Article 4 of the Law implemented by the Decree No.6821, of 28th December 1973
(Positions and Functions of the Employees of the Ministry of Economy and
Trade) shall be deemed void.
Article 64
1) The text of Article 8 of the Law implemented by the Decree No.6821 of 28th
December 1973 (Positions and Functions of the Employees of the Ministry of
Economy and Trade), shall be deemed void and substituted by the following
Article:
Article 8 (New):
First: The Consumer Protection Directorate shall, in cooperation with the official
and private authorities, implement consumer protection-related laws and
regulations, especially as regards the following:
-

Ascertaining the quality and safety of goods and services especially foodstuffs
and performing necessary tests on foodstuffs.
Controlling prices and prices movements.
Preparing documents and publications related to consumer education and
awareness.
Conducting researches about the abovementioned subjects.

Secondly: The Consumer Protection Directorate shall be composed of:
1- A Department of Studies and Awareness, tasked with providing information
about the laws and regulations related to consumer protection. Such
Department shall also be responsible for the preparation of studies and
suggestions and for the launch of awareness campaigns, in collaboration with
official and private authorities.
2- A Department of Control which shall be tasked with receiving and
investigating complaints and with implementing the laws and regulations
related to consumer protection.
2) The table No. (1) attached to the Law implemented by the decree No.6821 of 28th
December 1973 (Positions and Functions of the Employees of the Ministry of
Economy and Trade) and shall be substituted by the table No.(1) attached to this Law.
3) The Table No. (2) attached to this law shall specify the conditions required for an
employee to be placed on the books of the Consumer Protection Directorate.

20

Article 65
The regional Departments shall represent the Central Administration in the
governorates (Mohafazat), each within the scope of its activities. Such Departments
shall, investigate complaints, repress fraud, control price, ensure the quality and
safety of goods and services and implement the food safety policy. Subject to the
provisions of the legislative decree No.116 of 12 June 1959 (Administrative
Organization), the Regional Directorates shall relate, in terms of functions, to the
relevant unit at the Central Administration.
Article 66
The term “Consumer Protection Department” shall be replaced by the term
“Consumer Protection Directorate” in all legislative and regulatory texts.

Chapter Twelve
Consumer Protection Associations

Article 67
The aim of the Consumer Protection Associations is to:
•
•
•
•

•

Defend consumers' rights and interests.
Represent consumers collectively and free of charge, before official bodies
and administrations and suppliers, and to institute legal proceedings in
order to safeguard consumer rights.
Gather and disseminate data, analyses, tests and comparisons related to
goods and services and to the instructions for their use.
Lead consumer awareness and consciousness-raising campaigns, release
magazines, bulletins and publications and prepare radio-TV programs to
be broadcasted or published through the media, in pursuance with
applicable laws.
Offer consultations.

Article 68
Consumers Protection Associations shall comply with the legal texts related to
Associations and with the provisions laid down in this Law.
Article 69
A special register for the Consumer Protection Associations shall be established at the
Ministry of Economy and Trade. The method of keeping such register and
determining the effectiveness of its limitations shall be determined by virtue of a
Council of Ministers' decree proposed by the Minister of Economy and Trade.

21

Article 70
Each Consumer Association must notify the Ministry of Economy and Trade about
the completion of the procedures of its establishment, before the activities of such
association had been initiated.
Each of the said Associations must also:
1- Inform the Ministry of Economy and Trade about any modification introduced
either to its by-laws or to the bodies that are in charge of its administration.
2- Submit, every year, a copy of its budget and a report about its funding
resources to the Ministry of Economy and Trade.

Chapter Thirteen
Examination of Violations
Article 71
The employees of the Consumer Protection Directorate and of the Regional
Departments appointed in writing in due form of Law, shall control the
implementation of the provisions of this Law.
The implementation of the provisions of this Law shall also be controlled by the
following persons, each within the scope of its authority:
A) The judicial police officers officially commissioned,
B) Competent employees from the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of
Public Health, the Ministry of Tourism and the Ministry of Interior as well as
competent employees from the Customs Administration and the
Municipalities, under written mandates.
Article 72
The employees mentioned in Article 71 shall, under written mandates, and in
pursuance with the laws and regulations related to their functions, exercise the powers
vested in them at any business location of the supplier or manufacturer. Such
employees may also exercise their duties while the goods are being transported.
The said employees may not enter to other locations unless the supplier has given
express approval or unless a prior written approval has been given by the competent
Office of the Attorney General.
In any one case, the said employees may, if necessary, ask for the assistance of the
Internal Security Forces to carry out their tasks, after the competent Office of the
Attorney General has given approval

22

Article 73
First: The employees mentioned in Article 71, may require the person concerned to
submit any document, file or record evidencing the validity of the information given
by such person, and may request copies of the said documents and files, and ensure
their veracity by any legal means.
Secondly: The person concerned may, after reading the provisions of Article 107 of
this Law, specify the data that he wishes to keep secret.
Third: The person concerned shall have the right to specify the documents and
information that he wishes to keep confidential, after the provisions of Article 85 of
this Law are brought to his knowledge.
Article 74
The employees mentioned in Article 71 of this Law may, while exercising their
duties, take any of the following measures:
•

Seize the papers prescribed in Article 71 which proof the existence of the
violation or which allow to reveal the identity of all persons who took part in
the violation. That being the case, the employees must give a receipt to the
person concerned.

•

To seize the goods proved to be counterfeited, poisonous or unsuitable for
consumption or those proved to be incompliant with adopted standards or to
jeopardize consumer safety and health.

In such a case, the goods seized shall remain in the custody of their owners, until
the results of examinations and analysis have been issued, but for no longer than
45 days.
Article 75
Upon a written authorization from the competent Office of the Attorney General, the
employees mentioned in Article 71 of this Law, must seize any material, machine and
equipment used for the manufacturing, assembling and packaging of fraudulent
goods, goods incompliant with adopted standards or goods posing risk on consumer
health and safety.
The above-mentioned materials, machines and equipments must remain deposited
with their owner and in their custody, unless moved to a place specified by the
employees who have issued the report of violation.

23

Article 76
The goods proved to be counterfeited, poisonous or unsuitable for consumption may
be destroyed, at the expense of the person concerned, after the relevant Office of the
Attorney General has given written approval.
When necessary, the destruction requirements and procedures must be determined
upon the decision of the Minister of Economy and Trade.

Article 77
The employees mentioned in Article 71 of this Law, may take samples in accordance
with the international applicable standards and measures and with the provisions of
Article 79 of this Law.
The samples taken shall be analyzed in any of the laboratories specified by the
National Accreditation Council.
However, laboratory analyses may not be carried out if the fraud or the counterfeiting
is flagrant and if the goods are obviously unsuitable for consumption or incompliant
with applicable standards.
Article 78
The owner of the institution from which samples are taken, shall be given a receipt
listing the type, quantity, and sale price of the sampled goods. The receipt number
must be registered in the report of sampling. However, the person concerned may
submit a written objection to the Director of the Consumer Protection Directorate
located at the Ministry of Economy and Trade, about such procedure and about the
size, quantity and number of the sample. He may also send a copy of his objection to
the Central Inspection Office.
Article 79
The Minister of Economy and Trade and the competent Minister shall, in
collaboration with accredited laboratories and in accordance with applicable
standards, issue a decision determining the quantity to be sampled from each type of
goods, the method to be applied in order to obtain homogenous samples and the
precautionary measures for the transportation and preservation of such samples. Such
decision must also specify the goods that should not be sampled.
Article 80
Where the analysis shows the non existence of fraud or counterfeiting or proves the
suitability of goods for consumption or their compliance with adopted standards and
measures, the relevant administration must notify the person concerned in writing,
within three days from date of receipt of the laboratory report. The supplier may in
such case dispose of the goods

24

If, however, the analysis shows that the goods are fraudulent, counterfeited,
unsuitable for consumption or incompliant with adopted standards and measures, the
administration must enclose the laboratory report with the report of seizure and the
documents attached to it and refer them to the Consumer Protection Directorate,
within one week from date of receipt of the laboratory report.
Article 81
All employees mentioned in Article 71 of this Law must submit all reports and related
documents and files to the Consumer Protection Directorate, who shall refer them
back to the Office of the General Attorney or conduct further investigation or analysis
at the request of the Minister of Economy and Trade or of the person concerned,
within thirty day after the Minister of Economy and Trade had given approval.

Chapter Fourteen
Dispute Settlement
Article 82
The disputes of the value of no more than LBP 3 Million, which arise between a
consumer and a supplier or manufacturer and result from the implementation of this
Law, must be settled by mediation procedure in order to conciliate between the
parties to the dispute.
The dispute shall be submitted to the Dispute Settlement Committee mentioned in
Article 97 of this Law, whenever the value of the dispute exceeds LBP 3 million, or
whenever the mediation does not reach a partial or a complete agreement even though
the value of the dispute is less than the said amount.
First
Mediation

Article 83
A Mediator shall be an employee of the third grade or above, at the Ministry of
Economy and Trade. Such mediator shall be appointed by the Minister of Economy
and Trade, at the suggestion of the Director General of Economy and Trade and shall
not be a party to the dispute, object of mediation.
Article 84
The mediator shall hold his meetings at the locations determined by the Director
General of Economy and Trade.

25

Article 85
The dispute must be addressed to the mediator by the consumer or the supplier by
virtue of a petition presented against a receipt in which the dispute must be explained.
An LBP 10 000 stamp shall be imposed on such application.
Article 86
The mediator shall, within 3 days after the date of submission of the petition, summon
the parties to attend a meeting. The date and place of the meeting and the subjectmatter must be mentioned in the summons.
Article 87
The parties to the dispute may examine all papers documents and summons which are
available with the mediator.
Article 88
If one of the parties to the dispute, after being duly notified about the date of a
meeting, fails to attend such meeting, the mediator shall set a date for another
meeting. Should the same party, after being duly summoned, fail to attend the second
meeting, the mediation phase must be concluded and the mediator must submit the
file to the Dispute Settlement Committee mentioned in Article 97 of this Law.
Article 89
Each party to the dispute must be present or represented during all phases of
mediation.
Article 90
Each party to the dispute may submit all notes and documents to the mediator who
must send copies of such documents and notes to the other party, within three days
from date of receipt.
Article 91
The mediator shall have the right to seek the assistance of any person having relevant
expertise to help him in carrying out his tasks. Each party to the dispute must submit
all documents and information required by the mediator and the experts.
Article 92
The mediation phase must be concluded within fifteen days from the date of the first
meeting held. This time period may be extended by mutual agreement of both parties
or at the request of the mediator.

26

Article 93
The mediator shall propose his suggestions, in light of the stand point of both parties
to the dispute and of submitted documents and notes.
The mediator shall grant the parties to the dispute a two-day delay to decide on the
suggested solutions.
If the parties agree on a total or partial solution, the arrangement shall be mentioned
in the report of mediation and shall be signed by the mediator and the parties, and
shall be considered a binding agreement.
Where the parties do not reach a partial arrangement, the unsettled disputes must be
addressed to the Dispute Settlement Committee mentioned in Article 97 of this Law.
Article 94
Each party to the dispute shall have the right to obtain a true certified copy of the
reports of mediation, against the payment of a lump fee amounting to LBP 10.000
cashed against a receipt.
Article 95
If the mediator finds out that the acts of one of the parties are punishable by the Law,
he must submit a copy of the entire document to the Director General of Economy
and Trade, who must submit it, if necessary, to the competent Office of the Attorney
General, subject to the provisions of Article 81 of this Law.
Article 96
The mediator must prepare a quarterly report according to a model form set out at the
decision of the Minister of Economy and Trade. The mediator must submit such
report to the Director General of Economy and Trade and send a copy to the
Consumer Protection Directorate.
The said report must include a list of all cases that had been addressed to the mediator
along with the arrangements arrived at by the mediator, the obstacles that he had
faced while exercising his tasks and the solutions that he proposes.

27

Secondly
Dispute Settlement Committee

Article 97
One or more dispute settlement committee shall be established, for the purpose of
examining the disputes mentioned in Article 98 of this Law.
Such committees shall consist of an honorary judge or a judge of the 4th grade or
above acting as president, and of a representative of the Chambers of Commerce,
Industry and Agriculture, and a representative of the Consumer Protection
Associations, acting as members.
Within a transitional time period not exceeding six months, and until the above
mentioned Committees have been formed, the disputes shall be examined by an
honorary judge or a judge of the 4th grade or above, appointed by a decree issued at
the suggestion of the Minister of Justice with consent of the Higher Judicial Council.
The judges shall appoint the presidents of the Committees, by decrees issued at the
suggestion of the Minister of Justice with consent of the Higher Judicial Council. The
Committees' members shall be appointed by decrees issued by the Council of
Ministers at the suggestion of the Minister of Economy and Trade.
Article 98
The disputes arising between a supplier and a consumer or a manufacturer and
resulting from the implementation of the provisions of this Law shall fall exclusively
within the jurisdiction of the Dispute Settlement Committee, whatever the value of
the dispute, except for penal pursuits which shall remain under the jurisdiction of the
competent Penal Courts.
If the Dispute Settlement Committee finds out that the acts of one of the parties to the
dispute is punishable by the Law, the Committee must submit a copy of the entire file
to the Director General of Economy and Trade, who shall submit it, where necessary,
and upon the approval of the Minister of Economy and Trade, to the competent
Office of the Attorney General, subject to the Provisions of Article 81 of this Law.
Lawsuits treating of disputes of less than LBP 3 million shall not be submitted to the
Dispute Settlement Committee before the mediation phase prescribed in Article 81
and what follows, had elapsed.
Article 99
The lump fee imposed on lawsuits shall be collected against the disputes submitted to
the Dispute Settlement Committee.

28

Article 100
It shall be permissible to appear before the Dispute Settlement Committee without
having recourse to a lawyer.
Article 101
The rules and procedures prescribed in the Code of Civil Procedure must be applied
before the Dispute Settlement Committee.
Article 102
The judgments pronounced by the Dispute Settlement Committee's must be justified.
Such judgments cannot be reviewed for any reason whatsoever, except when
objection or third party objection are raised, or when a material error is to be
corrected, or when an appeal is lodged before the Civil Court of Appeal. The said
judgments shall be implemented by the relevant execution department.
Article 103
Should a convicted person refuse to execute the final judgment pronounced against
him, ten days after the judgment's notice had been communicated to him, he shall
incur, by law, a mandatory fine amounting to 3% for each month or a part of the total
amounts imposed.

Third
Various Provisions

Article 104
As of the date of the formation of the Dispute Settlement Committee or committees
mentioned in Article 101, the provisions of this Chapter may become applicable to
the disputes which had aroused before that date, if the parties to the dispute so agree
and if such disputes had not been submitted to the courts.

29

Chapter Fifteen
Sanctions
Article 105
Shall be punished by imprisonment from one to three months and by a fine varying
from LBP 10 to 50 million or by both such fine and imprisonment whoever commits
the acts prescribed in Article 11 of this Law.
Whoever publishes or broadcasts a misleading advertisement shall be regarded as a
perpetrator.
Article 106
Taking into account the provisions of Articles 564 and 565 of the Penal Code, a
manufacturer or supplier shall be deemed responsible for the damage resulting from
the proper use of the goods or services supplied by such supplier or manufacturer.
Article 107
The persons mentioned in Article 71 of this Law shall act in strict secrecy while
exercising their functions.
The results of tests and analysis performed on goods shall not be considered
confidential.
Shall be punished by imprisonment from ten days to six months and by a fine varying
from LBP 4 million to 15 million, whoever discloses the content of the documents or
information brought to his knowledge despite the concerned person's wish to keep
such information undisclosed.
Article 108
Shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to one year and by a fine
varying from LBP 20 to 75 million:
1- Whoever, by any means, circulates goods and services which are incompliant
with the safety-related adopted standards or whoever displays, distributes or
promotes the use of such goods and services, while the incompliance has been
brought to his knowledge or was supposed to be brought to his knowledge.
2- Whoever manufactures goods which are incompliant with the safety-related
adopted standards.
3- Whoever abstains from the implementation of the provisions of Article 44 of
this Law.

30

Article 109
Shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to one year and by a fine
varying from LBP 25 to 50 million, whoever knowingly commits the following acts:
•
•
•
•

To adulterate ingredients of human and animal foods, or
pharmaceuticals products, or drinks or industrial, agricultural or
natural products.
To trade in or circulate spoiled, polluted or expired foodstuffs.
To possess products or foodstuffs of the kind prescribed in the
above clauses.
To instigate the use of any product mentioned in this Article, by
the means prescribed in Clauses 2 and 3 of the Penal Code.

Article 110
The acts prescribed in the abovementioned Article shall be punished by imprisonment
from one year to three years and by a fine varying from LBP 50 million to 75 million
if they lead to the poisoning of a consumer or cause illness that makes a consumer
unemployed for no less than ten days.
Such acts shall be punished by imprisonment from three years to ten years and by a
fine varying from LBP 75 million to 150 million if they lead to the widespread of a an
epidemic or to the death of a human being.
Such sanctions shall be imposed even if the buyer is informed about the harmful
adulteration and putrefaction.
Article 111
Shall be punished by imprisonment from one month to one year and by a fine varying
from LBP 30 million to 50 million any supplier or manufacturer who deceives the
consumer in terms of either the nature of the goods and services or their essential
characteristics or composition or the quantity of beneficial elements contained in such
goods or services or their type or origin, whenever the type or origin are considered
by virtue of agreement and as custom has it the main reason for sale. The same
punishment shall apply when the consumer or manufacturer cheat with regard to the
suitability of goods or services for the purpose for which they are intended.
Article 112
The imprisonment prescribed in the previous Article shall be increased to two years
and the fine shall be doubled if the crime is committed:
-

through maneuvers and conspiracies aimed at thwarting the analysis of the
goods by modifying their composition, weight and volume.
Through the use of fraudulent data aimed at convincing the contractor that the
goods are identical to goods already analyzed and proved to be safe.

31

Article 113

Shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to two years and by a fine
varying from LBP 30 million to 50 million whoever knowingly uses fraudulent or
unchecked weighing and measuring devices with the purpose of cheating in terms of
the quantity of the delivered goods.
The same sanction shall be imposed on any fraudulent act related to the quantity and
description of the delivered goods, if such description constitutes the main reason of
the transaction.

Article 114
Shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years and by a fine
varying from LBP 40 million to 75 million whoever knowingly deceives the buyer
through the following acts:
1- By affixing a counterfeited trademark to his products or commercial items.
2- By selling or displaying products bearing a counterfeited or imitated mark.
Article 115
Shall be punished by imprisonment from ten days to one month and by a fine varying
from LBP 4 million to 10 million whoever stores or uses, in his warehouse, kiosk or
any other business location, measuring and calibration devices or other weighing or
measuring instruments different from the ones prescribed in the Law.

Article 116
Shall be punished by imprisonment from ten days to one month and by a fine varying
from LBP 4 million to 10 million whoever owns in the locations mentioned in the
previous Article, unchecked and fraudulent weighing, measuring or calibration
devices.
Article 117
One of the sanctions prescribed in each of the previous Articles shall be imposed if
the damage resulting from the violation is slight or if the damage is completely
removed before the lawsuit is addressed to the court. However, if the damage is
removed before the judgment is pronounced each sanction shall be reduced by
quarter.

32

Article 118
Shall be punished by a fine varying from LBP 30 million to 50 million the following
persons:
Whoever refrains from displaying the information determined by the competent
administrations in accordance with the Provisions of Article 7 of this Law, on the
label of the goods or the labels affixed to the packages of the goods.
Whoever refrains from providing to the consumer the essential information that
enables him to assess the potential risk that may result from the use of specific
goods or services within the prescribed period of their use.
Whoever refrains from specifying in writing the best method of use of specific
goods or services and the risks that may result from a deferred use.
Whoever violates the provisions of Articles 50 and 58 of this Law.
Article 119
Whoever violates the provisions of Articles 10, 25, 52, 53 and 54 of this Law, shall be
punished by a fine varying from LBP 15 million to30 million.
Article 120
Whoever violates the provisions of Articles 4, 5, 6, 7, 19, 20 and 25 of this Law, shall
be punished by a fine varying from LBP 5 million to 20 million.
General Provisions
Article 121
The sanctions prescribed in this Law must be doubled, if violations are repeated.
Article 122
The relevant court shall order to publish the judgment in full or partially in the news
papers designated by such court at the expense of the convicted person. The court
shall also order to affix the judgment clearly and legibly to the doors of the business
locations of the supplier or manufacturer.
Article 123
The Court may order to put the convicted person out of business permanently or for
no less than five years, even if such business does not require a certificate or a
government's authorization. In such a case, the Court may decide to close the business
location of the convicted person, temporarily or permanently.

33

Article 124
The Court may order to cease the trade in the goods or services which are object of
the violation temporarily and until the final judgment has been rendered. That being
the case, the Court's decision must carry immediate execution.
Article 125
In addition to the sanctions prescribed in this Law, the Court may order to confiscate
and destroy counterfeited goods and inexact and falsified weighting, measuring and
calibration instruments.
Article 126
If the court orders to confiscate goods administratively seized, the relevant
administration shall have the right to distribute such goods, if consumable, to public
interest associations.
Article 127
If the court does not order to confiscate the goods administratively seized, and if the
owner of such goods does not request to restitute them within six months after the
final judgment had been rendered, the Treasury shall benefit from such goods.

Article 128
Contrary to any other text, the inflicted fines and the money collected against vilating
goods shall be distributed as follows:
a- 60% shall be deposited in the Treasury.
b- 20% distributed by equal shares to the Judge's Mutual Aid Fund and the Judicial
Assistants' Mutual Aid fund.
c-20% shall be deposited in a common fund established at the Consumer Protection
Directorate. The revenues of such fund shall be distributed as follows:
-

45% distributed by individual shares for competent inspectors who are not
commissioned or who are assigned to carry out tasks and functions
independently from their functions.
Such shares shall be distributed as follows:
o 3 shares to the inspector who issues the report of seizure and whose
right shall abate three years after his term of office had expired.
o 2 shares to the competent inspector whose right shall abate three years
after his term of office had expired.
o One share to the employees of the Department whose rights shall abate
three years after their terms of office had expired.

34

o 45% to the heads and employees of the Consumer Protection
Directorate, upon a decision made by the Minister of Economy and
trade, at the suggestion of the Director General of Economy and Trade.
This right shall abate six months after the employee's term of
office had expired.
o 10% for the Consumer Protection Associations operating in Lebanon.

Chapter Sixteen
Final Provisions

Article 129
The legislative decree No.54, of 29 July 1983 (The Fraud Squad), the Articles of the
legislative decree No.71 of 9 September 1983 (Safety of all Classes of Foods) which
are inconsistent with the provisions of this Law and the Articles of the Legislative
decree No.73 of 9 September 1983 (Possession of and Trade in Goods, Products and
Crops) shall all be cancelled. The legal judgments, decrees and resolutions which are
inconsistent with this Law or incompatible with its content shall also be cancelled.
Article 130
The Minister of Economy and Trade shall carry out the functions prescribed in
Articles 39 and 49 of this Law until the Lebanese Accreditation Council established
by the Law No.572 of 11 February 2004 has came into office.
Article 131
The details of the implementation of the present Law shall be determined, when
necessary, by virtue of decrees issued by the Council of Ministers, at the suggestion
of the Minister of Economy and Trade.
Article 132
The present Law shall be published and shall come into force three months after its
publication in the Official Gazette.

35

36

