New
Code of Criminal Procedure
Act No. 328 of 7 August 2001
as amended by Act No. 359 of 16 August 2001

–

Statute Law

–

Guiding Principles

–

Table summarizing the time-limits laid down in the new Code of
Criminal Procedure

Printed and distributed by
Legal Publications Agency
under the supervision of
Mr Houssam Afif Chamseddine

Beirut 2001

English version (STL Draft Official Translation from Arabic)
Version 1.1

2

Act No. 328
Code of Criminal Procedure
as amended by Act No. 359 of 16 August 2001
General provisions
Article 1 - The purpose of the Code of Criminal Procedure is to regulate criminal justice and to
define its scope and the measures to be taken in criminal investigations and trials. It also sets out the
types of appeal available against judgements and decisions rendered.
A further purpose is to regulate the procedures for bringing to light the facts and evidence of
criminal offences in application of criminal legislation.
Article 2 - Ordinary criminal trials are divided into the following categories:
(a)
A Single Judge hears all cases concerning misdemeanours and contraventions unless
special provision is made for exceptions. The Public Prosecution Service is not represented;
(b)
Each chamber of an Appeal Court is composed of a President and two Auxiliary Judges.
The Public Prosecution Service is represented by an Appeal Court Prosecutor, an Appeal Court AdvocateGeneral, the Financial Prosecutor or an Advocate-General attached to the Financial Prosecutor’s Office;
(c)
Each chamber of the Court of Cassation is composed of a President and two Auxiliary
Judges. The Public Prosecution Service is represented by the Public Prosecutor at the Court of Cassation
or an Advocate-General of the Court of Cassation.
Article 3 - The Investigation Department in each governorate is composed of the First
Investigating Judge and one or more Investigating Judges, depending on the provisions of the
Administration of Justice Act.
A chamber of the civil Appeal Court performs the functions of an Indictment Division in each
governorate.
Article 4 - The Administration of Justice Act establishes the procedures governing the
appointment of judges, the number of chambers of the Court of Cassation in the capital city, and the
number of Appeal Court chambers, Single Judges, Investigating Judges and Advocates-General in the
capital city, the governorates and the districts.
Public prosecutions and civil actions
Article 5 - Responsibility for initiating a public prosecution, the purpose of which is to prosecute
perpetrators of crimes and their accomplices and to subject them to penalties and other measures, lies
with the Judges of the Public Prosecution Service in accordance with this Code. Every aggrieved person
also has the right to bring a civil action for damages suffered as a result of an offence.
Any person against whom a public prosecution is initiated shall be termed a defendant; a person
charged with a misdemeanour shall be termed a charged person; and a person accused of committing a
felony shall be termed an accused.
Article 6 - The Public Prosecutor’s Office shall be responsible for exercising the public
prosecution. It may not discontinue the proceedings or arrange an amicable settlement.
English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

3
A civil action may be initiated following the public prosecution before the judicial authority
responsible for the latter. Such an action may also be brought separately before the competent civil
authority.
Article 7 - Any aggrieved person may assume the status of a civil party before the First
Investigating Judge in the case of a felony or misdemeanour or before the Single Judge in the case of a
misdemeanour or contravention. A civil party may also be joined to the public prosecution before the
Criminal Court.
An aggrieved person may file suit to bring a public prosecution if the Public Prosecutor’s Office
has not done so. The party may withdraw the civil action or reach an amicable settlement without
thereby affecting the public prosecution unless the circumstances are such that the extinction of the
civil action entails the extinction of the public prosecution.
Article 8 - An aggrieved person who has brought an action before the competent civil court may
not abandon the case and bring an action before a criminal court unless the Public Prosecutor’s Office
initiated a public prosecution on a date subsequent to that on which the party brought the action before
the civil court, provided that a final judgement has not been delivered in the civil proceedings.
The competent civil authority shall not proceed with a civil action until the public prosecution
has been finally disposed of; a court of summary jurisdiction shall be authorized to take summary
measures even if a civil action has been brought before the criminal court.
Article 9 - The public prosecution shall be initiated before the criminal authority which has
jurisdiction in the area in which the crime was committed, the place of residence of the defendant, or
the place in which the defendant was arrested.
Article 10 - The public prosecution shall be extinguished under the following circumstances:
(a)

Death of the defendant;

(b)

A general amnesty;

(c)
Expiry of a prescription period of ten years in the case of a felony, three years in the
case of a misdemeanour, and one year in the case of a contravention;
(d)

Extinction of the civil action in the cases specified by law.

– The prescription period shall begin to run in the case of one-time offences on the date of
their occurrence. In the case of continuing, persistent or successive offences, the prescription period
shall begin to run on the date on which the criminal situation comes to an end.
– The expiry of the prescription period for the public prosecution shall entail the suspension of
all acts of prosecution, investigation or trial.
– The grounds for prescription of public prosecutions shall also be applicable to civil actions.
However, the grounds for prescription of civil actions shall not entail the prescription of public
prosecutions.
– The prescription period shall be suspended if it proves impossible, because of force majeure,
to perform any act of prosecution, investigation or trial, and it shall resume as soon as the impediment
is eliminated.
– The above-mentioned provisions regarding the prescription period shall not preclude the
application of provisions regarding certain misdemeanours and contraventions.

English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

4
– The criminal court that is seized of an action shall continue, in the event of the extinction of
the public action on one of the above-mentioned grounds, to hear the civil action. It shall order the
confiscation of impounded articles if such articles are prohibited by law.
–

The prescription period for the civil action is governed by the Civil Code.

– The provisions of the Criminal Code governing the prescription period shall be applicable to
the penalties imposed.

English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

5
Part I
The Public Prosecution Service
Article 11 - Public prosecutions at the Court of Cassation are conducted by the Public Prosecutor
with the assistance of Advocates-General.
The duties of the Financial Prosecutor’s Office at the Court of Cassation are performed by the
Public Prosecutor with the assistance of Advocates-General.
The duties of the Public Prosecutor’s Office at the Appeal Court are performed by the Public
Prosecutor with the assistance of one or more Advocates-General.
The work of the Public Prosecutor’s Office at the Military Court is carried out by a Government
Commissioner, who is subject to the authority of the Public Prosecutor at the Court of Cassation and is
assisted by one or more Advocates-General.
Article 12 - Each Public Prosecutor heads a department and assigns activities falling within his
remit to the Advocates-General who assist him in his duties.
Chapter I
Duties of the Public Prosecutor at the Court of Cassation
Article 13 (as amended by Act No. 359/2001) - The Public Prosecutor’s Office at the Court of
Cassation is headed by a Public Prosecutor who is appointed by a decree of the Council of Ministers
based on a proposal by the Minister of Justice. He is assisted by Advocates-General.
The authority of the Public Prosecutor at the Court of Cassation extends to all Judges of the
Public Prosecution Service, including the Government Commissioner at the Military Court. He shall
provide them with written or oral instructions for the conduct of the public prosecution. They shall be
free, however, to make statements at trial hearings.
The prosecutor shall refer to them, depending on their area of jurisdiction, the reports and
records produced with respect to any offence, and request them to conduct the requisite public
prosecution.
Subject to Article 79 of the Organization of the Legal Profession Act, in all cases in which a
criminal prosecution requires a licence or the consent of a non-judicial authority, the Public Prosecutor
at the Court of Cassation shall be empowered, where a dispute arises between the authority in question
and the Appeal Court Prosecutor’s Office, the Financial Prosecutor’s Office or the Government
Commissioner at the Military Court, to take a final decision on the matter notwithstanding any public or
private provision.
Article 14 (as amended by Act No. 359/2001) - The Minister of Justice may request the Public
Prosecutor at the Court of Cassation to prosecute any offences of which he has knowledge.
The latter shall be entitled, if necessary, to undertake the investigation directly or through his
assistants – the Judges of the Public Prosecution Service assigned to assist him or members of the
Judicial Police force subject to his authority – but he shall not be entitled to lay charges.
Article 15 - The Public Prosecutor at the Court of Cassation oversees the actions of Judicial
Police officers in the performance of their duties as assistants to the Public Prosecutor’s Office. He may
make such observations as he sees fit to their supervisors regarding the work referred to above, and
may request the Appeal Court Prosecutor, the Financial Prosecutor or the Government Commissioner at
English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

6
the Military Court to take action against any officer who commits a criminal offence during the
performance of his duties or in connection with their performance, without having to obtain prior
permission. Such offences shall be handled by the ordinary courts notwithstanding any provision to the
contrary.
Article 16 - The Appeal Court Prosecutor, the Financial Prosecutor, the Government
Commissioner at the Military Court, the Director-General of the Internal Security Forces, the DirectorGeneral of General Security and the Director-General of State Security shall inform the Public Prosecutor
at the Court of Cassation of serious offences of which they have knowledge and shall comply with his
instructions in this regard.
The Public Prosecutor at the Court of Cassation may inspect the file pertaining to an
investigation being conducted by an Investigating Judge and ask the responsible Public Prosecutor to
show that the submissions comply with his written instructions.
He may admonish a members of the Public Prosecution Service for any shortcomings in their
work, or he may recommend to the Judicial Inspectorate that they be referred to the Disciplinary Board.
Article 17 - The Public Prosecutor at the Court of Cassation shall undertake the following
activities:
(a)
Apply for the setting aside of judgements and decisions in criminal proceedings in
accordance with the procedures laid down in this Code;
(b)
Demand that a judicial authority be designated and that a case be transferred from one
court to another;
(c)

Prosecute offences referred to the Judicial Council;

(d)
Prosecute offences committed by members of the national legal service either within or
outside the context of their judicial office;
(e)
Represent the Public Prosecutor’s Office at the Court of Cassation and before the
Judicial Council;
(f)
Deal with requests for the extradition of criminals and forward them to the Minister of
Justice together with his observations;
(g)
Compile a detailed report for insertion in the case file of persons sentenced to death
when the case is referred to the Pardon Commission;
(h)

Any other duties and powers mentioned in this Code and in any other legislation.

English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

7
Chapter II
Duties of the Financial Prosecutor’s Office
Article 18 - The Financial Prosecutor is appointed by a decree of the Council of Ministers based
on a proposal by the Minister of Justice.
The Financial Prosecutor shall exercise, within the limits of the duties specified in this Code, the
same powers as those of the Public Prosecutor at the Court of Cassation.
Article 19 - The Financial Prosecutor has the authority to prosecute the following offences:
(a)
Offences arising from breaches of the provisions of the legislation relating to duties and
taxes in the various public utilities and establishments and municipalities, including state and municipal
taxes, customs duties, and telecommunication and wireless communication fees;
(b)
Offences arising from breaches of the legislation concerning banks, financial institutions
and the stock exchange, particularly those defined in the Currency and Credit Act;
(c)
Offences arising from breaches of the legislation on joint-stock companies and offences
by multinational companies;
(d)
Offences that adversely affect the State’s financial standing, or Lebanese or foreign
banknotes circulating by law or by custom in Lebanon, and offences involving the counterfeiting, forgery
and circulation of currency, public securities, stamps and stamped papers;
(e)

Offences involving the embezzlement of public funds;

(f)

Offences pertaining to bankruptcy.

Article 20 - Banking offences arising from breaches of the Law on Currency and Credit may be
prosecuted only on the basis of a written request from the Governor of the Banque du Liban.
Offences pertaining to customs duties may be prosecuted only on the basis of a written request
from the Director-General of Customs. In cases where the administration concerned is entitled to reach
an amicable settlement with the defendant, the public prosecution shall be extinguished if the
settlement is reached prior to the delivery of a judgement. Enforcement of the penalty shall be
suspended if the settlement is reached thereafter, provided that no contrary legal provision is
applicable.
Article 21 - The Financial Prosecutor shall exercise the powers vested in him by this Code under
the authority of the Public Prosecutor at the Court of Cassation and subject to the rules and regulations
applied by the Appeal Court Prosecutor on the basis of this Code and financial legislation.
These powers of the Financial Prosecutor shall extend throughout the Lebanese territory. In this
connection, he may request, through the Public Prosecutor at the Court of Cassation, the Appeal Court
Prosecutor in any governorate to initiate a public prosecution before the Investigating Judges or to
initiate proceedings directly before the courts exercising jurisdiction.
Article 22 - The Financial Prosecutor may seek the assistance of experts in banking, fiscal and
financial affairs in performing technical tasks, after they take the oath of legal expertise, unless they are
sworn experts.
The Public Prosecutor at the Court of Cassation may, of his own motion or at the request of the
Financial Prosecutor, request the Prime Minister through the Minister of Justice to instruct the Central
Inspectorate to undertake an investigation into any financial matters that he is authorized to have
examined.
English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

8
Article 23 - The Financial Prosecutor’s Office shall maintain a special legal record of all
companies to which Decree No. 3094 of 25 January 1993 is applicable. He shall record all criminal
judgements delivered against them.
The registrars at the courts exercising jurisdiction shall inform the Financial Prosecutor’s Office
of any criminal judgement that has been or is being delivered against a company so that it may be
recorded in the special legal register of companies within three months of the date of the judgement.
Chapter III
Duties of the Public Prosecutor’s Office at the Appeal Court
and procedures in the case of offences discovered during their commission or immediately afterwards
Section I
Duties of the Public Prosecutor’s Office at the Appeal Court
Article 24 - The duties of the Public Prosecutor’s Office at the Appeal Court are as follows:
(a)
To investigate offences characterized as misdemeanours or felonies and to prosecute
those who participated in their commission. The office may apply directly for assistance from the law
enforcement authorities in the performance of its duties;
Where it obtains knowledge of the commission of a serious offence, it shall immediately inform
the Public Prosecutor at the Court of Cassation and carry out his instructions.
(b)

To initiate and exercise public prosecutions;

(c)
To represent the Public Prosecution Service at appeal courts and criminal courts and to
enforce their judgements;
(d)
To issue a wanted notice if the person named in a complaint or a suspect cannot be
found or if his domicile is unknown; the notice shall contain his full identity and the details of the alleged
offence;
–

When a warrant is executed, the issuing Prosecutor’s Office shall be informed forthwith.

– The warrant expires ten days after its date of issue unless the Public Prosecutor decides to
extend it for thirty days, following which it shall expire.
(e)
To set aside criminal judgements or to stay or suspend their enforcement pursuant to
Article 147 of the Criminal Code;
(f)

To carry out any other duties assigned to it under this Code and any other legislation.

The Advocate-General at the Appeal Court may perform the duties of the Appeal Court
Prosecutor set out in this Code.
Article 25 - The Public Prosecutor’s Office obtains information regarding offences by one or
more of the following means:
(a)

Investigations conducted by the office itself;

(b)
Reports from the official authority or an officer who obtained knowledge of an offence
during the performance of his duties or concurrently or in connection with their performance. He is

English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

9
entitled to carry out an investigation in public administrations or establishments but he may not initiate
proceedings;
(c)
Preliminary inquiries conducted by the Judicial Police force where it has been instructed
to investigate offences, and the reports it submits relating thereto;
(d)
Complaints or reports filed with it directly or through the Public Prosecutor’s Office at
the Court of Cassation or its assistants;
(e)

Any lawful means that enables it to obtain information regarding the offence.

Article 26 - The Public Prosecutor’s Office at the Appeal Court brings charges and names those
charged with the offence. It may bring charges against an unknown person before the Investigating
Judge, thereby initiating a public prosecution.
Article 27 - A complaint is filed by a victim or his legal representative and a report is submitted
by an informant who knew of the offence or heard about it. A report is admissible only if it is submitted
in writing and signed by the informant or his legal representative.
Every complaint or report shall state, clearly and in full, the name of the complainant or
informant and his place of residence.
Article 28 - Any person who witnesses a breach of the peace or an offence against a person’s
safety, life or property is required to report the matter to the Appeal Court Prosecutor or one of his
assistants in the place where the offence occurred, the place where the perpetrator was apprehended,
or his place of residence. Anyone who fails to comply with this requirement without lawful excuse shall
be prosecuted before the Single Criminal Judge responsible for the area where the offence occurred and
shall be sentenced to a fine of between two hundred thousand and two million Lebanese pounds.
Section II
Procedures to be followed by the Public Prosecutor’s Office
in the case of an offence discovered during its commission or immediately afterwards
Article 29 - An offence discovered during its commission or immediately afterwards is:
(a)
(b)
commission;
(c)

An offence discovered as it occurs;
An offence where the perpetrator is apprehended during or immediately after its
An offence following which the suspected perpetrator is chased by hue and cry;

(d)
An offence detected immediately after being committed with clearly discernible signs of
its commission;
(e)
An offence where a person is caught in possession of articles, weapons or documents
indicating that he is the perpetrator within twenty-four hours of the commission of the offence.
Article 30 - Felonies and misdemeanours shall have the status of offences discovered during
their commission or immediately afterwards if they occur within a dwelling whose owner or occupier
requests the Public Prosecutor’s Office to conduct an investigation within twenty-four hours of their
discovery.
Article 31 - In the case of a felony discovered during its commission or immediately afterwards,
the Public Prosecutor or the Advocate-General shall proceed forthwith, on receiving the information, to
English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

10
the scene of the crime and shall inform the First Investigating Judge or the Investigating Judge on duty
thereof, without being required to wait for him to arrive in order to take the following steps:
(a)
Prepare a report describing the traces left in connection with the crime, the scene and
the apparent circumstances of the crime;
(b)
Seizure of weapons and other items used in the commission of the offence as well as
any items that may assist in establishing the facts, and questioning of the suspect about the seized items
shown to him;
(c)
Interview of persons who witnessed the offence or obtained information concerning it
after they swear an oath as legal witnesses.
Each statement shall be reflected in a record, which shall be signed by the Public Prosecutor or
Advocate-General, the clerk and the witness. If the latter refuses to sign, this shall be noted in the
record.
Article 32 (as amended by Act No. 359/2001) - The Public Prosecutor or the Advocate-General
may prohibit persons present at the scene of the felony from leaving it. Anyone who breaches the
prohibition decision shall be prosecuted before the Single Criminal Judge responsible for the area where
the offence occurred and shall be sentenced to a fine of between two hundred thousand and two
million Lebanese pounds.
If there are strong suspicions regarding one of the persons present, the prosecutor or his deputy
shall order his arrest for questioning and the person shall remain in custody for the purposes of the
investigation for a period not exceeding forty-eight hours unless additional time is required for the
investigation, in which case his custody shall be extended for a further forty-eight hours. The person
being questioned may appoint an advocate to be present during the questioning. During the period of
custody, he, his advocate, or a member of his family may request a medical examination, and the Public
Prosecutor or the Advocate-General shall appoint a doctor as soon as the request is made. The Judicial
Police officers and their assistants shall not be present when the doctor carries out the examination. The
doctor shall submit his report to the person who authorized the examination and present a copy thereof
to the defendant within a period not exceeding forty-eight hours.
If the suspect absconded or was not present at the beginning of the investigation, the Public
Prosecutor or the Advocate-General shall issue a warrant to bring the suspect before them immediately.
When the suspect appears before them, they shall question him forthwith.
The submission of a report shall not of itself be a sufficient ground to issue a summons in
respect of a person whose place of residence is known.
Investigative measures relating to a felony discovered at the time of its commission or
immediately afterwards shall end eight days after their commencement.
Article 33 - The Public Prosecutor may enter a suspect’s home to search for items that he
believes will help to shed light on the investigation. He may seize such items, which shall be described
clearly and in detail in his report. He may also decide to retain the seized items, depending on their
nature. The search shall be conducted in the presence of the suspect or the defendant. If the suspect or
defendant is not present or refuses to take part, if he is unable to be present or if he has absconded, the
search shall be conducted in the presence of his advocate, two adult members of his family, or two
witnesses selected by the Public Prosecutor.

English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

11
– As soon as the search is completed and the items seized, the Public Prosecutor shall display
the seized items to the suspect, the defendant, his advocate or the aforementioned persons and ask
each person to sign the record. If they refuse, this shall be noted in the record.
– If the Public Prosecutor finds prohibited items during the search, he shall seize them. If they
are not items resulting from, used in or associated with the offence, he shall report them in a separate
record.
– The Public Prosecutor may instruct a Judicial Police officer to conduct a search of the home
of the suspect or defendant, on his authority and under his control in accordance with the rules to be
observed by the Public Prosecutor himself.
– It is permissible to enter homes to conduct a search or to look for a perpetrator only
between 5 a.m. and 8 p.m. unless the homeowner explicitly agrees to such actions outside that time
period. However, the Public Prosecutor or the authorized Judicial Police officer may conduct a search or
look for a suspect at any time in public places or in places that have acquired such status by virtue of the
use made of them.
Article 34 - If the nature of the crime or its impact requires the assistance of one or more
experts to clarify technical points, the Public Prosecutor shall appoint the expert and clearly specify his
assignment.
– If the victim’s condition necessitates medical assistance or an autopsy, the Public Prosecutor
shall send for a forensic or specialist physician and give him clear and detailed instructions regarding his
assignment.
– The expert or doctor shall carry out the assignment only after swearing an oath to act truly
and faithfully.
– He may not exceed the bounds of the assignment. After completing it, he shall file a report
specifying the authority that appointed him, the task assigned, the measures taken and his conclusions.
Article 35 - The Public Prosecutor shall take any other investigative measures he deems
necessary to gather useful information regarding the felony, to collect evidence and to identify the
perpetrators or accomplices. The measures must be lawful and must not be vitiated by moral or
material coercion.
He shall record in his reports all measures taken, the time of their commencement and
completion, and all means employed in their implementation. He shall then sign each report together
with the clerk who assisted him.
Article 36 - The Public Prosecutor shall suspend his investigation of an offence discovered during
its commission or immediately afterwards when the Investigating Judge arrives, and he shall provide the
judge with his reports and the items seized, except for those which are unrelated to the offence and
were seized on the ground that they are prohibited items. The Public Prosecutor shall inform the
Investigating Judge of the offence that has been committed and shall name any persons whose
involvement in the offence appears to be supported by evidence or suspicions. He shall charge those
against whom evidence exists or who are suspected of having participated in the commission of the
offence. If the time limit applicable to offences discovered during their commission or immediately
afterwards expires before the Investigating Judge arrives, the Public Prosecutor shall complete his
investigations and forward the documents contained in the case file to the Investigating Judge, together
with the statement of charges.

English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

12
Article 37 - When an offence discovered during its commission or immediately afterwards
occurs within his area of jurisdiction, the Single Judge shall proceed to the scene to undertake an
investigation if the Public Prosecutor or the Investigating Judge is not present. He shall observe the rules
applicable to the Public Prosecutor in this regard. He shall suspend his inquiries as soon as either of
them arrives. On completion of his investigation, he shall forward the file to the Public Prosecutor.

English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

13
Part II
The Judicial Police
Chapter I
Members of the Judicial Police
Article 38 - The duties of the Judicial Police are performed, under the supervision of the Public
Prosecutor at the Court of Cassation, by Public Prosecutors and Advocates-General.
The persons listed below assist the Public Prosecution Service and work under its supervision in
performing the duties of the Judicial Police within their fields of competence, as specified in this Code
and in the legislation governing their profession:
1.

Governors and district commissioners;

2.
The Director-General of the Internal Security Forces, officers of the Internal Security
Forces, the Judicial Police, non-commissioned officers serving in the regional sectors, and the heads of
Internal Security Forces police stations;
3.
The Director-General of General Security, General Security officers and noncommissioned General Security investigators; the Director-General of State Security, the Deputy
Director-General, State Security officers and non-commissioned State Security investigators;
4.

Village mayors;

5.

Captains of ships and aircraft.

Article 39 - Village guards, supervisory officials at the Ministry of Health, forest and consumer
protection supervisors, customs supervisors, tobacco control supervisors, supervisors at ports and
airports and at the Ministry of Tourism and night watchmen may keep an account of all infringements
within their fields of competence and in accordance with the regulations they are required to apply,
record them in rigorously compiled reports and submit them to the competent Single Judge.
Chapter II
Measures to be taken by the Judicial Police
in connection with offences whether or not they were discovered during or immediately after their
commission
Article 40 - Judicial Police officers shall take the same measures in the case of an offence
discovered at the time of its commission or immediately afterwards as are taken by the Public
Prosecutor when he is unable to do so himself. In undertaking such measures, the Judicial Police officer
shall comply with the legal rules applicable to the Public Prosecutor when he investigates an offence
discovered at the time of its commission or immediately afterwards.
Moreover, in the case of offences not discovered at the time of their commission or
immediately afterwards, the Judicial Police, acting on the instructions of the Public Prosecutor’s Office,
shall investigate felonies or misdemeanours that are the subject of complaints and reports referred to
them by the Public Prosecutor’s Office.

English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

14
Section I
Measures to be taken by the Judicial Police in connection with offences discovered at the time of their
commission or immediately afterwards
Article 41 - If an offence discovered at the time of its commission or immediately afterwards
occurs, the Judicial Police officer shall proceed forthwith to the place where it occurred and shall inform
the competent Public Prosecutor thereof. He shall preserve any clues, traces and evidence that might
disappear and anything that might assist in shedding light on the facts. He shall look for and seize
weapons and materials used in or resulting from the commission of the offence. He shall interview
witnesses without requiring them to take an oath. He shall make inquiries, arrest anyone who is strongly
suspected of having committed the offence or of having participated in its commission, conduct a search
of his home and seize any incriminating materials or prohibited items that he finds. He shall seek expert
assistance if necessary. He may question the suspect provided that the latter makes his statement of his
own free will in full knowledge of the facts and without being subjected to any form of coercion. If he
decides to remain silent, he may not be compelled to speak.
The Judicial Police officer who investigates the offence discovered during its commission or
immediately afterwards shall inform the competent Public Prosecutor of his inquiries and shall comply
with his instructions.
If the competent Public Prosecutor directs the Judicial Police officer to perform certain acts that
fall within his jurisdiction, he shall act within the parameters of the assignment.
Article 42 (as amended by Act No. 359/2001) - If the offence discovered at the time of its
commission or immediately afterwards is a felony, and the requirements of the investigation demand
that the suspect be held in custody for a longer period, the time limit may be extended up to a
maximum period of four days upon a reasoned decision in writing by the Appeal Court Prosecutor, who
shall issue it after examining the file and verifying the justifications provided. During the extended
period, the suspect, his advocate or a member of his family may request that he be examined by a
doctor. The Public Prosecutor shall appoint a doctor as soon as the petition is filed and the doctor shall
carry out the examination without a Judicial Police officer being present and shall submit his report to
the Public Prosecutor within twenty-four hours. In all circumstances, this period of custody shall be
deducted from any sentence imposed.
The Judicial Police officer shall observe strict confidentiality in all the measures that he takes. If
it is ascertained that he divulged the content of seized documents or letters or any confidential material
that the suspect wished to remain secret, he shall be prosecuted before the Single Criminal Judge with
jurisdiction for the area in which the acts complained of occurred and shall be punishable by
imprisonment of between one month and one year, and/or a fine of between two hundred thousand
and two million Lebanese pounds.
Article 43 - If the Judicial Police officer believes that a person who is not under strong suspicion
possesses documents or materials that are useful for the investigation, the Public Prosecutor or the
Investigating Judge shall carry out a search of the person’s home instead of the Judicial Police officer
unless the person concerned consents without coercion to a search by the latter.
Any house search carried out by the Judicial Police in breach of the rules of procedure legally
applicable to the Public Prosecutor in the case of felonies discovered during their commission or
immediately afterwards shall be declared null and void. A Judicial Police officer who enters a home and
undertakes a search in violation of these rules shall be liable to prosecution for the misdemeanour

English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

15
defined in Article 370 of the Criminal Code. However, the nullity shall be applicable only to the search
and not to the other investigative measures.
Article 44 - If the Public Prosecutor or the Investigating Judge is present, the Judicial Police
officer shall suspend his operations unless he receives written instructions from either of them to
continue. Under such circumstances, he may also be tasked with questioning the suspect.
Once the situation pertaining to offences discovered during their commission or immediately
afterwards has come to an end, the Judicial Police officer may not carry out any additional inquiries but
shall transmit the records he has compiled to the Public Prosecutor forthwith, together any items seized
during the search.
Article 45 - In the event of a felony or misdemeanour discovered at the time of its commission
or immediately afterwards being punishable by imprisonment, any person is entitled to arrest the
perpetrator caught in the act and to take him to the nearest Judicial Police station.
Article 46 - If the offence discovered at the time of its commission or immediately afterwards is
a misdemeanour punishable by imprisonment of at least one year, the Judicial Police officer may arrest
the suspect and investigate the misdemeanour under the authority of the Public Prosecutor.
The Public Prosecutor may decide to detain a person charged with a misdemeanour and to bring
him forthwith before the Single Judge so that he may be prosecuted in accordance with the rules laid
down in this Code.
Section II
Measures to be taken by the Judicial Police
in connection with offences other than those discovered at the time of their commission or
immediately afterwards
Article 47 (as amended by Act No. 359/2001) - Judicial Police officers, acting as assistants to the
Public Prosecutor’s Office, shall perform the duties assigned to them by the Public Prosecutor’s Office.
They investigate offences not discovered at the time of their commission or immediately afterwards,
gather information, make inquiries aimed at identifying the perpetrators and accomplices and gather
evidence against them, and carry out actions necessitated by these duties, such as the seizure of
incriminating items, the conduct of physical searches of crime scenes, scientific and technical analyses of
any samples, and taking statements from witnesses without requiring them to take an oath and of
statements from persons complained of or suspects. If they refuse to make a statement or remain silent,
this fact shall be mentioned in the record; they may not be coerced to speak or to undergo questioning,
on pain of nullity of their statements.
Judicial Police officers shall inform the Public Prosecutor’s Office of the measures they take and
shall abide by its instructions. They may not search a home or person without obtaining prior permission
from the Public Prosecutor’s Office. If permission for a search is granted, they shall abide by the legal
rules applicable to the Public Prosecutor in the case of offences discovered at the time of their
commission or immediately afterwards. Any search conducted in breach of these rules shall be null and
void. However, the nullity shall be applicable only to the search and not to other unrelated measures.
Judicial Police officers may not detain a suspect at the police station without a decision by the
Public Prosecutor’s Office and the period of detention shall not exceed forty-eight hours. This period
may be extended by a similar period subject to the consent of the Public Prosecutor’s Office.
English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

16
The period of custody shall be calculated from the time of arrest.
The suspect or person complained of shall enjoy the following rights from the time of his arrest
for the purposes of the investigation:
1. To contact a member of his family, his employer, an advocate of his choosing or an
acquaintance;
2. To meet with the advocate he appoints by a declaration noted in the record; the official
authorization to act prescribed by the rules shall not be required;
3. To request a sworn interpreter if he is not proficient in the Arabic language;
4. To submit a request for a medical examination to the Public Prosecutor either directly or
through his advocate or a member of his family. The Public Prosecutor shall appoint a doctor as soon as
the request is made. No Judicial Police officer shall be present when the doctor carries out the
examination. The doctor shall submit his report to the Public Prosecutor within a period not exceeding
twenty-four hours. A copy of the report shall also be provided to the Public Prosecutor who ordered the
examination. The detainee and any of the above-mentioned persons may request an additional
examination if the period of custody is extended.
The Judicial Police shall inform the suspect upon arrest of the rights set out above and this step
shall be noted in the record.
Article 48 - If the Judicial Police officer breaches the rules concerning the detention of the
defendant or suspect, he shall be liable to prosecution for the offence of unlawful detention set out in
Article 367 of the Criminal Code and punishable by virtue of the same Article, irrespective of whether or
not the offence was discovered during its commission or immediately afterwards.
Article 49 - The Public Prosecutor may carry out the preliminary investigation himself. If he does,
the suspect’s advocate may be present with his client during the questioning.
If he does not carry out the investigation himself, he shall scrutinize the preliminary
investigations conducted by the Judicial Police officer, with the exception of the questioning of the
suspect or person complained of. If he ascertains that the offence is a felony or if a misdemeanour
necessitates further investigation, he shall seize the Investigating Judge.
If the investigation of a misdemeanour proves to be sufficient, he shall seize the competent
Single Judge.
Article 50 - The Public Prosecutor may decide to retain the documents resulting from the
preliminary investigation if he considers that the act does not constitute an offence, that there is
insufficient evidence that an offence has been commiteed, or that the public prosecution has been
extinguished for one of the reasons set out in Article 10 of this Code.
The Public Prosecutor who brings charges in a case is not entitled to undertake an investigation
or to deliver a judgement thereon.

English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

17
Part III
Investigating Judges and their duties
Chapter I
Organization of the Investigation Departments
Article 51 - An Investigation Department composed of a First Investigating Judge and
Investigating Judges is attached to each Appeal Court. The Investigation Department is headed by the
First Investigating Judge.
The submission containing the Public Prosecutor’s Office’s charges is filed with the First
Investigating Judge. Actions brought directly by victims of crimes discovered during their commission or
immediately afterwards based on their personal charges are also submitted to him.
The First Investigating Judge investigates important cases himself and may assign other cases to
the Investigating Judges in his department.
He oversees the smooth running of his department.
Article 52 - The Investigating Judge to whom a case is referred may not refuse to investigate it.
He may, however, recuse himself. Any party to the litigation may request that he be disqualified.
The rules laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure shall be applicable to anyone requesting
withdrawal or disqualification.
If an Investigating Judge is prevented by any impediment from performing his duties, the First
President of the Appeal Court shall appoint a Judge to replace him.
The Investigating Judge who investigates a case is not entitled to try the case or to participate in
the trial.
Article 53 - The investigation shall remain confidential until such time as the case is referred to
the trial court, except for matters pertaining to the indictment decision. Anyone who breaches the
confidentiality of the investigation shall be liable to prosecution before the Single Judge in whose area of
jurisdiction the act complained of occurred; he shall be punishable by imprisonment of between one
month and one year and by a fine of between one hundred thousand and one million Lebanese pounds
or by either of these two penalties.
Article 54 - Appeals against the Investigating Judge’s decisions lie with the Indictment Division,
which has sole authority to issue indictments in the case of felonies and exercises the right of transfer in
legally specified cases.

English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

18
Chapter II
Duties of the Investigating Judge in the case of offences discovered at the time of their commission or
immediately afterwards
Article 55 - In the event of an offence discovered during its commission or immediately
afterwards, the Investigating Judge shall proceed to the scene of the crime and initiate an investigation
without waiting for the Public Prosecutor. If the Public Prosecutor arrives at the scene, he may not
participate in the investigation or undertake a separate investigation himself. He may, however, submit
any application he sees fit to the Investigating Judge. If he was the first to arrive at the scene of the
crime and initiated an investigation, he shall suspend it and comply with the provisions of Article 36 of
this Code.
The Investigating Judge shall be accompanied to the scene of the crime by the clerk of his
department. If he requests the assistance of an officer of the Judicial Police, the latter shall take an oath
to perform his work truly and faithfully and to preserve the confidentiality of the investigation.
Article 56 - The Investigating Judge shall exercise, in the case of a felony discovered during its
commission or immediately afterwards, all the prerogatives enjoyed by the Public Prosecutor. He shall
carry out all the acts and measures assigned to him and specified in Articles 31, 32, 33, 34 and 35 of this
Code.
Article 57 - On completion of the measures required by the investigation of a felony discovered
during its commission or immediately afterwards, the Investigating Judge shall hand over the documents
to the Public Prosecutor, who shall bring charges against the suspect and file his submissions.
After the Public Prosecutor’s Office brings charges, the Investigating Judge shall undertake the
investigation in accordance with the normal rules.
The Public Prosecutor may examine the file pertaining to the investigation at any time and
submit his requests in writing. The Investigating Judge shall examine them and decide to accept or reject
them. If he rejects them, he shall inform the Public Prosecutor thereof. The latter is entitled to file an
appeal with the Indictment Division against any decision contrary to his submission. The Investigating
Judge must abide by the Indictment Chamber’s decision regarding the appeal.
Article 58 - In the case of a misdemeanour discovered during its commission or immediately
afterwards which is punishable by one year of imprisonment or less, the Public Prosecutor may ask the
Investigating Judge for leave to proceed to the scene of the misdemeanour to conduct an on-site
investigation.
The Investigating Judge shall oversee the measures undertaken in the investigation of a felony
discovered during its commission or immediately afterwards.

English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

19
Chapter III
Duties of the Investigating Judge in the case of offences not discovered at the time of their
commission or shortly afterwards
Section I
General provisions
Article 59 - The Investigating Judge may conduct an investigation in the case of an offence not
discovered at the time of its commission or shortly afterwards only if he conducts the public prosecution
on the basis of charges brought by the Public Prosecutor’s Office, a direct complaint filed by the victim in
the capacity of a civil party, a decision to designate the judicial authority or a decision to transfer the
case.
Article 60 - The Investigating Judge shall conduct the public prosecution in rem. He may
question as a defendant anyone suspected of having committed the offence as a perpetrator,
accomplice, accessory or instigator independently of the charges brought by the Public Prosecutor’s
Office.
If he detects in the course of the investigation criminal acts unrelated to the act charged, he
shall transmit the file to the Public Prosecutor so that he may bring the relevant charges. However, if the
offences disclosed are related to the act charged, he may issue a joinder to the ongoing investigation
without having them referred to him beforehand.
Article 61 - The Investigating Judge must use lawful means in undertaking all investigative
measures aimed at establishing the truth. He shall record all measures undertaken in writing.
If the investigation requires an inspection of the scene of the crime, the Investigating Judge shall
proceed to the scene together with the clerk of his department. He shall inform the Public Prosecutor of
this step without waiting for him, and shall take the samples in accordance with the rules.
Section II
Charges submitted by the Appeal Court Public Prosecutor’s Office to the Investigating Judge
Article 62 - The charges submitted by the Public Prosecutor to the Investigating Judge shall
contain a description of the offence, specify the identity of all those who participated in its commission,
the place in which the criminal act occurred and the time of its occurrence, and state his requests.
If he has been unable to identify all the participants in the offence, he shall bring charges against
those identified or else against an unknown person.
The Public Prosecutor’s charges shall initiate a public prosecution, brought either by himself or
by one of the Advocates-General.
The Public Prosecutor shall attach to the charges the relevant documents, records and
supporting evidence.
Article 63 - The Investigating Judge may not refuse to conduct the public prosecution set in
motion by the Public Prosecutor’s charges unless it transpires that the act of which he has been seized
does not constitute a criminal offence or that the public prosecution has been extinguished on a specific
legal ground. He shall not take such a decision without consulting the Public Prosecutor.

English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

20
He may decide to stay the public prosecution by a decision taken after consulting the Public
Prosecutor if he ascertains that another Investigating Judge has already conducted the same
investigation or an investigation into a related offence.
The Public Prosecutor may request the Investigating Judge to refrain from proceeding with the
prosecution if it involves circumstances in respect of which charges have already been brought, or if it is
related to another prosecution under investigation and is being joined thereto.
Article 64 - It is not for the Investigating Judge to quash the charges brought by the Public
Prosecutor’s Office at the Appeal Court on finding a flaw that is liable to render his conduct of the
investigation unsound. However, he may decide to refrain from conducting an investigation on account
of the flaw. If the Public Prosecutor decides not to rectify the flaw, he shall appeal the Investigating
Judge’s decision before the Indictment Division.
Article 65 - The Investigating Judge may, after consulting the Public Prosecutor’s Office, decide
that he lacks competence to investigate the case if it falls outside his territorial or ratione materiae
jurisdiction or on account of the status of the defendant. His decision in this regard may be appealed to
the Indictment Division.
Article 66 - The Public Prosecutor may file supplementary charges in respect of acts that were
omitted from his original statement of charges and against persons omitted from that statement or
from his subsequent statement. The Investigating Judge shall question the persons concerned as
defendants and treat them as such throughout the investigation.
Article 67 - The victim of a crime may file civil charges with the Investigating Judge in connection
with the public prosecution initiated by the Public Prosecutor’s Office’s statement of charges.
He is required to elect a domicile in the town or borough in which the Investigating Judge’s
office is located if his actual domicile is not in that location. Should he fail to do so, he may not object if
he is not served with the documents to which he is legally entitled.
The victim may be fully or partially exempted from paying the costs of the proceedings, even in
the event of a decision not to prosecute the defendant, if it is demonstrated that he did not abuse the
right to bring an action.
If he is a foreign national, he shall provide surety, the scale and nature of which shall be
determined by the Investigating Judge. He may be exempted from providing surety if his civil action
warrants such exemption.
Section III
Charges filed by the direct victim of an offence
with the Investigating Judge
Article 68 - Any victim of a felony or misdemeanour may file a complaint directly with the First
Investigating Judge who has jurisdiction over the area in which the offence was committed, the place of
residence of the defendant or the place in which he was arrested. The victim may assume the status of a
civil party.
The complaint shall be recorded in the registry of the First Investigating Judge, who shall
determine the costs to be paid in advance, comprising legal fees and costs, which shall not exceed one
per cent of the cost of the proceedings. In addition, he shall instruct the complainant, if he is a foreign

English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

21
national, to present surety in the form of legal tender or property, the scale of which shall be
determined in his decision.
The complainant shall be exempted from paying an advance if the offence complained of is a
felony.
If the act is a misdemeanour, the Investigating Judge may exempt the complainant from paying
an advance if he is financially unfit to do so. He may also exempt a foreign complainant from paying
surety on the same ground by a reasoned decision.
The complaint filed by a complainant who acquires the status of a civil party and who makes the
required payment, unless exempted therefrom, automatically initiates a public prosecution. If either of
these two conditions is not met, it shall be regarded as a report and referred to the Public Prosecutor for
a decision on whether to initiate a public prosecution.
The complainant may withdraw the civil action. If he does so within two working days of the
date of his complaint, he shall not be liable for the costs of withdrawal. His withdrawal shall not affect
the course of the public prosecution except in cases where the extinction of the civil action leads to the
extinction of the public prosecution.
Article 69 - The First Investigating Judge shall personally undertake the investigation into a
direct complaint, however he may assign it to an Investigating Judge in his department.
The Judge handling the direct complaint shall initiate the investigation after consulting the
Public Prosecutor’s Office at the Appeal Court. However, he shall not be bound by its opinion if it
involves a refusal to proceed with the public prosecution already initiated by a civil action in accordance
with the provisions of Article 68, paragraph 4, of this Code. He shall deliver a copy of the complaint and
its attachments to the defendant at least twenty-four hours before questioning him.
Article 70 - The Public Prosecutor may challenge the status of the civil party to the prosecution
before carrying out the investigation. The defendant or his advocate may raise this plea prior to the
questioning. The Investigating Judge, after informing the civil party of the plea and giving him twentyfour hours to respond, shall issue a ruling after consulting the Public Prosecutor’s Office at the Appeal
Court.
Article 71 - If the Public Prosecutor ascertains that the complaint is unclear, he may request the
Investigating Judge to proceed with the investigation forthwith before deciding on his position. In these
circumstances, the Investigating Judge shall question the persons designated in the complaint as
defendants and shall interview the witnesses. He shall then transmit the file to the Public Prosecutor so
that he can decide whether to prosecute. The Investigating Judge may, on obtaining evidence that
persons interviewed as witnesses participated in the offence, question them as defendants provided
that he abides by Article 61 of this Code.
Article 72 - If the Investigating Judge decides to stay the prosecution of a person designated by
the complainant, the defendant may apply to the Single Criminal Judge for an award of damages against
the civil party for abuse of his right to bring an action. He shall bring his action, on pain of inadmissibility,
within three months of the date of being notified of the decision to stay the prosecution.

English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

22
Chapter IV
Investigative measures
Section I
Procedural objections
Article 73 - The defendant, or his advocate in the absence of his client and the Public
Prosecutor’s Office may raise any of the following objections once only prior to the questioning of the
defendant:
1. Objection to jurisdiction;
2. Objection of nullity of the public prosecution on one of the legally established grounds of
nullity;
3. Objection of inadmissibility of the prosecution on a ground that precludes hearing or
proceeding with the case before its substance is examined;
4. Objection on the ground that the act charged does not constitute a legally prosecutable
offence;
5. Objection of lis pendens or lis alibi pendens;
6. Objection of res judicata;
7. Objection of nullity of one or more investigative measures.
The Investigating Judge, after hearing the civil party and consulting the Public Prosecutor’s
Office, shall rule on the objection within a week of the date on which it was filed.
Any party to the proceedings may appeal his decision.
Section II
Questioning of the defendant
Article 74 - The Public Prosecutor shall verify the defendant’s identity and ascertain his family
name and first name, his age, his place of birth, his parents’ names, his place of residence, his social and
civil status and his criminal record. He may seek the assistance of psychiatric and medical experts in
assessing the defendant’s mental and physical health. If the defendant or his advocate requests a
psychological or physical examination, the Investigating Judge may deny the request only on the basis of
a reasoned decision.
Article 75 - The Investigating Judge shall question the defendant in his department unless the
latter is unable to attend owing to illness, disability or some other valid excuse. Having verified the
impediment, the Investigating Judge shall travel, together with his clerk, to the place in which the
defendant can be questioned in accordance with the rules set out below.
Article 76 - When the defendant appears before him for the first time, the Investigating Judge
shall inform him of the charges against him, summarizing the facts and informing him of the evidence in
his possession or of the suspicions against him so that he can refute them and mount a defence. The
Investigating Judge is not required to provide him with a legal characterization of the facts.

English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

23
The Investigating Judge shall inform him of his rights, particularly the right to the assistance of
an advocate during the questioning.
If the Investigating Judge fails to inform the defendant of the charges against him, as set out
above, or to inform him of his right to the assistance of an advocate, the results of the questioning shall
be inadmissible as evidence.
Article 77 - The Investigating Judge shall respect the principle of the defendant’s exercise of free
will during the questioning and shall ascertain that he is making his statement without any outside
influence of a moral or material nature.
If the defendant refuses to respond and chooses to remain silent, the Investigating Judge may
not compel him to speak.
If the defendant shows signs of physical, psychological or mental illness during the questioning,
the assistance of a medical expert may be sought to diagnose his condition.
Article 78 - If the defendant declines the assistance of an advocate, the Investigating Judge is
not required to appoint counsel on his behalf. This fact shall be recorded on pain of nullity of the
questioning and the subsequent measures. He shall question him in the absence of counsel and proceed
with the investigative measures.
If the defendant chooses an advocate to defend him, the Investigating Judge may not question
him or proceed with the investigative measures unless the advocate is present and is informed of all the
investigative acts except for the witnesses’ statements, on pain of nullity of the questioning and of the
subsequent measures. If the defendant is unable to appoint an advocate, the Investigating Judge shall
appoint one or ask the President of the Bar Association to do so. At any time during the investigation,
the defendant may inform the Investigating Judge of the name of the advocate whom he has appointed
to defend him. If he chooses more than one advocate for the purpose, he shall inform the Investigating
Judge of the name of the advocate who should be served with notice of the case.
The notice inviting the advocate to attend shall be sent at least one day before the questioning.
The Investigating Judge’s clerk shall note this step in the record, mentioning the date on which notice
was served. If the advocate is not notified before the date of the hearing, his presence during the
questioning, without raising an objection to the failure to serve notice, shall preclude the nullity of the
questioning.
If the client’s advocate fails to attend without a lawful excuse in spite of being duly informed of
the date of the hearing, the Investigating Judge may proceed with the questioning.
Article 79 - Before each examination after the preliminary questioning, the Investigating Judge
shall ask the defendant whether he still consents to being questioned without the constant assistance of
an advocate, and shall note this step in the record on pain of nullity of the examination in question and
the subsequent measures.
The defendant may communicate freely with his advocate throughout the investigation period.
Their communications shall be confidential. Any evidence resulting from a breach of the principle of
confidentiality shall be inadmissible.
Article 80 - As an exception to the provisions of Articles 78 and 79 of this Code, the Investigating
Judge may take a reasoned decision to begin questioning the defendant forthwith if there is a risk that a
clue or evidence may disappear.

English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

24
He may question the defendant without the presence of an advocate in the case of an offence
discovered during its commission or immediately afterwards or the equivalent thereof.
Article 81 - If the defendant’s advocate is present during the questioning, he may not put any
questions with his client or the opposing party except through the Investigating Judge. He is permitted
to make observations and to object to any aspect of the Investigating Judge’s questioning which, in his
view, breaches the rules governing the investigation. If the Investigating Judge does not permit the
advocate to speak, to put a question, to make observations or to raise objections, this fact shall be
noted in the record of the questioning.
The Public Prosecutor or one of his assistants may attend the questioning of the defendant, and
he may raise questions or make observations through the Investigating Judge.
If the defendant is not proficient in the Arabic language, the Investigating Judge shall appoint an
interpreter, who shall begin his work after taking an oath to perform his duties honestly and with
integrity.
If the defendant is mute, deaf or unable to express himself, the Investigating Judge shall appoint
a person who can communicate with him in sign language or in some other way after taking an oath to
perform his duties honestly and with integrity. If a deaf or mute person is able to write, the questions
and his answers shall be recorded in writing. The paper recording his answers shall be attached to the
record of questioning.
The civil party, the property administrator and the surety may be present during the questioning
of the defendant or may appoint an advocate for the purpose. They may each put questions and make
observations through the Investigating Judge.
If there is more than one defendant in the case, it is not permissible for one of them or for his
advocate to attend the questioning of the other defendants except during confrontations between the
defendants.
Article 82 - If the Investigating Judge has questioned the defendant about an offence as though
it constituted a misdemeanour and then ascertains that it should be characterized as a felony, he shall
repeat the questioning and indicate that the defendant is entitled to the assistance of an advocate if he
has not appointed one to defend him.
Subject to the provisions of the penultimate paragraph of Article 81 of this Code, the defendant,
the civil party, the property administrator and the surety or their advocates may attend the investigative
proceedings, except for the hearings of witnesses. They shall each be notified of the proceedings at least
twenty-four hours before the investigative measures concerning them. Otherwise the measures
undertaken in their absence shall be null and void.
If persons who were to be summoned present themselves without objecting to the manner in
which they were notified or to the failure to comply with the twenty-four hour time limit, the
investigative proceedings shall be deemed to be valid.
The property administrator and the surety shall each elect a domicile within the town or
borough in which the Investigating Judge’s department is located, if they have no actual domicile there,
for the service of documents and notices. If they fail to do so, they may not object to the failure to serve
the documents of which they should be legally notified.
Each of the aforementioned persons shall inform the Investigating Judge in writing of any
change in his actual or elected domicile. If these persons fail to do so, notices served at the domicile
recorded in the case file shall be valid.
English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

25
Article 83 - The Investigating Judge may decide to prohibit communication for a period not
exceeding five days with a defendant who is being held in custody. The prohibition shall not be
applicable to communications between the defendant and his advocate.
If an arrest warrant for a detained defendant is executed in his absence, the Investigating Judge,
on being apprised of the detention, shall summon the detained defendant and question him concerning
the charges against him in accordance with the rules set out above.
Article 84 - If a defendant who resides outside the Investigating Judge’s area of jurisdiction
presents a lawful excuse for his inability to present himself before him, the Investigating Judge may
request the Investigating Judge or the Single Judge with jurisdiction over the defendant’s place of
residence to assist in questioning him. He may not appoint a Judicial Police officer for this purpose.
The Investigating Judge may not terminate his investigation without questioning the defendant
unless questioning is impossible because he has absconded, or unless he concludes that the evidence
assembled is sufficient to terminate the proceedings without the need for questioning.
Section III
Hearing of witnesses
Article 85 - If the proceedings require the hearing of statements from the President of the
Republic, the Speaker of the Chamber of Deputies or the Prime Minister, the Investigating Judge and his
clerk shall proceed to the relevant office and take his statement.
Article 86 - The Investigating Judge shall summon the persons whose names appear in the
complaint, the report or the submissions as well as anybody else who, in his view, may be able to
provide evidence to assist the investigation.
– He need not summon a witness named by the civil party or the defendant if he considers
that the hearing would serve no purpose. However, if he declines to hear a witness named by the Public
Prosecutor's Office, he shall take a reasoned decision in that regard.
– The summons shall be served on the witness at least twenty-four hours before the time set
for the hearing.
– Notice shall be served on members of the diplomatic or consular service through the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
– Summonses to members of the armed forces shall be served through their respective
commands.
– If the witness resides abroad, the summons shall be served by registered mail with
acknowledgement of receipt.
–

If he is in custody, the witness shall be conveyed under escort.

Article 87 - Before being heard, the witness shall present the summons to appear that he
received, and this shall be noted in the record. If he attends before being summoned, he may not refuse
to make a statement on the ground that he was not notified of the time of his appearance.
The Investigating Judge shall interview each witness individually in the presence of his clerk.
The Investigating Judge shall first ask the witness to state his first name and family name, the
names of his parents, his age and profession, his domicile or the place where he is staying, and whether
he is married to, in the service of or related to one of the parties, asking him to specify the degree of
English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

26
affinity, and shall then require him to take the following oath: “I swear by almighty God to tell the truth,
the whole truth and nothing but the truth.” This shall be noted in the record.
The witness shall make his statement orally and may rely on supporting documents.
The statement of each witness shall be reflected in a record containing the questions put to him
and his answers.
The witness’s statement shall be read to him and he shall approve it, signing it on each page. If
he refuses to sign or is unable to do so, this shall be noted in the record.
The number of pages constituting the witness’s statement shall be noted at the end of the
record. The Investigating Judge and his clerk shall sign each page. A list of the names of the persons
heard and the dates of the hearings shall be included in the official record.
If exhibits are shown to the witness, this shall be noted in the record.
The same rules of procedure shall be applicable to hearings of statements by the civil party, the
defendant, the property administrator, the surety and the expert.
Only the person harmed by a breach of one of the above-mentioned rules may request that the
record be annulled.
Article 88 - If the witness is not proficient in the Arabic language, the Investigating Judge shall
appoint an interpreter, who shall take an oath to perform his duties honestly and with integrity before
starting work, unless he is already a certified interpreter.
Article 89 - If the witness makes a false statement, lies or conceals some or all of what he knows
regarding the facts of the case concerning which he is being questioned, the Investigating Judge shall
refer the record of his statement to the Public Prosecutor’s Office at the Appeal Court so that he may be
prosecuted for the offence of perjury defined in Article 408 of the Criminal Code.
Article 90 - The record of the investigation shall contain no deletions, annotations or additions.
If it is necessary to cross out or insert a word, the Investigating Judge, the clerk and the witness
shall express their approval of the deletion, annotation or addition by signing the margin of the record.
Any unapproved annotation, deletion or addition shall be null and void, and the provisions of
the last paragraph of Article 87 of this Code shall be applicable thereto.
Article 91 - The Investigating Judge shall hear minors under 18 years of age as a source of
information.
If a minor over 15 years of age has taken a legal oath, his statement shall be considered valid
and he may not be prosecuted for the offence of perjury.
The ascendants and descendants of the defendant, his brothers and sisters and relatives by
marriage of the same degree, his spouse even if they are divorced, and informants who are legally
entitled to financial reward for their information are not allowed to testify.
The Investigating Judge may hear a statement from any of the aforementioned persons as a
source of information.
Article 92 - A witness may not be excused from testifying unless it can be demonstrated that he
is legally bound to secrecy.
If the Investigating Judge ascertains that the witness’s plea of professional or banking secrecy is
legally inappropriate, he shall take a reasoned decision, after consulting the Public Prosecutor’s Office at
English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

27
the Appeal Court, to dismiss the plea. The witness may file an appeal against the decision within twentyfour hours of the date of his notification thereof.
Any person who possesses information that might shed light on the investigation is required to
bring it to the attention of the Investigating Judge. If he fails to do so, he shall be liable to a fine of
between 100,000 and 200,000 Lebanese pounds, payable in the same manner as taxes. If the
information in question is likely to prove the innocence of the defendant, a person who fails to testify or
who withholds proof of its existence shall be liable to prosecution pursuant to Article 567 of the Criminal
Code, as amended.
Article 93 - The Investigating Judge shall order that the witness be reimbursed for his travel
expenses and the party who requested his presence shall be liable for payment. In the case of a public
prosecution, the Treasury shall be liable for payment.
Article 94 - If the witness resides outside his area of jurisdiction, the Investigating Judge may
request the Investigating Judge or Single Judge in whose area of jurisdiction he resides to take his
statement.
The requesting Judge shall inform the requested Judge clearly and in detail of the facts
concerning which the witness should be questioned. The requested Judge shall duly hear the witness’s
statement immediately after he takes the oath and shall send the record containing the statement in a
sealed envelope to the requesting Judge as speedily as possible.
Article 95 - Any person who has been duly notified of his duty to appear before the Investigating
Judge to testify is under an obligation to appear.
If he fails to do so without a lawful excuse, the Investigating Judge shall send a further
summons to attend the next hearing after imposing a fine of between 50,000 and 100,000 Lebanese
pounds. If he again fails to appear, a warrant shall be issued to have him brought before before the
Investigating Judge. If the witness pleads illness and provides a doctor’s certificate in support of his
inability to appear, the Investigating Judge may dismiss the plea if he considers that it is not serious, or
he may appoint another doctor or medical panel to examine the witness and determine whether his
state of health prevents him from appearing.
If it appears to the Investigating Judge that the certificate is fallacious, he shall compile a report
and refer it to the Public Prosecutor’s Office so that the witness and the doctor who drew up the
certificate may be prosecuted pursuant to Article 466 of the Criminal Code.
If a plea other than illness is raised and it appears to the the Investigating Judge that it is
fallacious, he shall compile a report and refer it to the Public Prosecutor’s Office so that the witness may
be prosecuted pursuant to Article 407 of the Criminal Code.
Article 96 - If the witness is unable to come to the office of the Investigating Judge on account of
illness, disability or force majeure, the Judge and his clerk may travel to his place of residence and take
his statement.
Article 97 - In the absence of his clerk or a clerk of the Investigation Department, the Public
Prosecutor’s Office or the courts, the Investigating Judge may appoint an Internal Security Forces officer,
who shall record the witness’s statement after taking an oath to perform his assignment honestly and
with integrity.
If there is no clerk available to compile the record, the Investigating Judge may do so himself.
The record that he compiles under these circumstances shall not be null and void.

English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

28
Section IV
Attendance, searches and seizure of evidence
Article 98 - The Investigating Judge may travel with his clerk to carry out an inspection of the
scene of the crime or to search a residence for incriminating materials or items capable of shedding light
on the investigation. He shall inform the Public Prosecutor of his movements. If the latter accompanies
him, he shall conduct the inspection and search in his presence; if he does not, he shall conduct them
alone.
The inspection or search shall be conducted in the presence of the civil party and the defendant.
If one of them is not present or is unable to attend, it shall be conducted in the presence of his
advocate, two witnesses who are members of his family or two witnesses chosen by the Investigating
Judge.
The Investigating Judge shall compile a detailed record of the investigative measures or the
search, which shall be signed by himself, his clerk and all those present. If exhibits or items of interest to
the investigation are seized, he shall include a sufficiently detailed description of the nature of each
item. He shall preserve the exhibits and articles as befits their nature, placing them under the seal of the
Investigation Department and attaching a label listing the seized items, signed by the Investigating
Judge, his clerk and those present.
If the seized items are registers, documents or statements of account, they shall be placed in
sealed envelopes bearing the seal of the Investigation Department, and labelled with a list of the items.
These will be kept at the Investigation Department.
If the seized items consist of bullion, banknotes or securities, they shall be placed in envelopes
bearing the seal of the Investigation Department, labelled with a detailed record of the items seized and
deposited in the Palace of Justice vault.
If confidential documents are seized during the search, they shall be numbered and may be
viewed only by the Investigating Judge and their owner. They shall be placed in sealed envelopes
bearing the seal of the Investigation Department and a label shall be attached stating that they are
confidential and indicating the quantity of documents involved and the numbers assigned to them.
Article 99 - If the seized items include any article that cannot be transported to the Investigation
Department or the secure depository at the Palace of Justice because of its size or dangerous nature,
the Investigating Judge shall deposit it with whichever party he deems best suited to look after it. This
shall be noted in a record signed by the Investigating Judge, his clerk, the owner of the seized item and
the person with whom it has been deposited.
Article 100 - When prosecuting a lawyer, the Investigating Judge may not search his office
without first informing the President of the Bar Association thereof, except in the case of an offence
discovered during its commission or immediately afterwards.
–

The Investigating Judge shall not breach professional secrecy during the search.

– The President of the Bar Association or a person designated by him may be present during
the search.
– Any interception of the suspected lawyer’s communications shall require a judicial decision
and prior notification of the President of the Bar Association.
Article 101 - If the Investigating Judge finds prohibited items during the search, the acquisition
or possession of which constitutes a misdemeanour or a felony, he shall seize them, even if they are
English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

29
unrelated to the offence being investigated, note this fact in a record signed by himself, his clerk and
anyone present during the search, and send the items together with the record to the Public
Prosecutor’s Office.
Article 102 - Seals placed on seized items and items held in safekeeping may be broken only in
the presence of the Investigating Judge, his clerk, the defendant or his advocate, and the person who
searched his home or in whose presence the search was undertaken. If any of the aforementioned
persons fails to appear, the seals shall be broken in their absence provided that they were informed of
the time set for the procedure.
The Investigating Judge may examine telegrams and correspondence and keep those which he
deems necessary to shed light on the facts or which, if seen by third parties, might prove harmful to the
investigation. He may not reveal the contents of any seized telegram or correspondence without the
consent of the party concerned.
The Investigating Judge may not examine correspondence between the defendant and his
advocate.
Article 103 - If the Investigating Judge considers that the investigation will not be served by
keeping some or all of the seized items, he shall return them to the legal claimant unless the claim is
subject to a legal dispute. If there is a serious dispute regarding the right of ownership or possession of a
seized item that may be returned, the Investigating Judge shall defer its return until the dispute has
been settled.
If the civil party or the defendant requests the return of a seized item, the Investigating Judge
shall rule on the request after consulting the opposing party and the Public Prosecutor’s Office. An
appeal against his decision in this regard may be filed within twenty-four hours of the date on which he
informs the party to the dispute against whom the decision was taken.
Article 104 - If the Investigating Judge wishes to search a residence located outside his area of
jurisdiction, he shall seek the assistance of the Investigating Judge or the Single Judge in whose
jurisdiction the residence is located.
He shall describe the assignment clearly and in detail. The requested Judge shall undertake the
assignment and abide by the rules governing the seizure of exhibits or items that may serve the
purposes of the investigation. He shall compile a record thereof, sign it together with his clerk and the
owner of the residence or two witnesses, and send it with the seized exhibits and items to the
requesting Judge in a sealed envelope bearing the seal of his department, attaching a label listing the
seized items.
Article 105 - Any search undertaken in breach of the rules set out above shall be null and void.
Any investigative measures based thereon shall also be null and void.
The nullity shall not preclude the use of information brought to light by the search for the
purposes of the investigation if it includes supporting evidence.
The measure shall not be null and void if the aggrieved party consents thereto.

English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

30
Chapter V
Orders issued by the Investigating Judge
during the investigation
Section I
Summonses, warrants to produce a person before the Judge
and arrest warrants
Article 106 - The Investigating Judge may issue a summons to the civil party, defendant, witness,
property administrator or surety to attend a hearing, specifying the date and time.
The defendant shall proceed to the Investigating Judge’s department on being served with the
summons and shall appear before him. If he fails to attend, without presenting a lawful excuse, or if the
Investigating Judge fears that he may abscond, a warrant to produce him before the Judge shall be
issued, containing a written order to the law enforcement authorities to ensure his presence within
twenty-four hours of the date of the scheduled hearing.
The Public Prosecutor’s Office shall execute the warrant to produce him before the Judge.
Article 107 - The Investigating Judge shall question the summoned defendant forthwith. A
defendant against whom a warrant to be produced before the Judge has been issued shall be
questioned within twenty-four hours of the time of execution of the warrant.
– After twenty-four hours have elapsed, the chief of the police station shall automatically
conduct the defendant to the Public Prosecutor, who shall request the Investigating Judge to question
him. If the latter refuses, if he is absent or if he is precluded from questioning him by a lawful
impediment, the Public Prosecutor shall request the First Investigating Judge to question him or to
appoint an Investigating Judge to do so. If it proves impossible to question him, the Public Prosecutor
shall order his immediate release. If he is held for more than twenty-four hours without being brought
before the Public Prosecutor, the custody shall be deemed wrongful and the responsible officer shall be
prosecuted for the offence of deprivation of personal liberty.
– After questioning the defendant and consulting the Public Prosecutor’s Office, the
Investigating Judge may issue an arrest warrant if the offence with which the defendant is charged is
punishable by more than one year’s imprisonment or if he has a previous criminal conviction or has
been sentenced to more than three months’ imprisonment without suspension.
– The arrest warrant shall be based on a reasoned decision and the Investigating Judge shall
state the factual and material grounds supporting his decision to issue the warrant, whether the reason
is that pre-trial detention is the only way to preserve the evidence or the incriminating material traces,
to prevent the coercion of witnesses or victims, or to prevent the defendant from communicating with
accomplices or with accessories or inciters, or whether the purpose of the arrest is to protect the
defendant himself, to terminate the impact of the offence or to prevent its recurrence, to prevent the
defendant from absconding or to preclude any breach of public order arising from the offence.
– The summons issued to the defendant, the warrant to produce him before the Judge and
the arrest warrant must state his identity and the date on which it was issued. It must contain a
description of the defendant and the offence with which he is charged and the legal provision applicable
thereto, and bear the signature of the Investigating Judge who issued it and the seal of his department.

English version (STL Draft Official Translation of Arabic)
Version 1.0

